It is curious that the one appealing thing about Ken Clarke - his enormously advanced age - should be perceived as a weakness. There are, of course, a hundred anti- age-discrimination reasons, too worthy to list here, to applaud the promotion, at his third attempt, of a man who has reached the official age of retirement. But it is the return from holiday of Tony Blair, still in the grip of what seems to be one of the longest and most florid mid-life crises in modern history, that now shows Clarke's seniority in such an appealing light.On a superficial level, there is the guarantee that Clarke will never appear in T-shirts with a Burberry trim, in thick makeup, or having recently been made over by a fitness expert. Neither he nor his wife will advertise their prodigious sexual energy. He will not have to waste eight hours a week in the gym strengthening the muscles that will be seen when he deliberately takes his shirt off in public, or risk his heart murmur playing tennis, or dive off boats, or do any of the other things that people aged around 25 do in advertisements for cars.More importantly, we will be spared, with Clarke, the middle-aged man's horror of the old, and his consuming, rather pitiful need to identify himself incessantly with youth and novelty, in everything from pop music to technology to millennia. Above all, the wonderful ancientness of Clarke ensures that when he goes, he goes. With Blair, who is still distracted by the business of middle age, there is one certainty: like Clinton, he will never fully leave us alone. We will be at his side as he allows himself to go grey, exchanges tennis for golf, and makes his first, hesitant experiment with Viagra. After eight years of Blair, the only possible objection to Clarke is that he would be an even safer bet at 70.<b>The milk of human self-interest</b>The celebrity gynaecologist, Professor Lord Robert Winston, is a very clever man. He has created thousands of babies. He is always on telly. He is a peer of the type whose illimitable wisdom supplies champions of the unreformed Lords with their last remotely persuasive argument for not electing its members. Professor Lord Robert Winston, in fact, is so brainy that, were he to tell you to do something, you'd be a fool not to do it. This week, large newspaper advertisements have featured the Labour peer posing in the guise of an enlightened milkman with a litre bottle of full-fat in his hands, over a caption which trumpets the health benefits of St Ivel's Omega 3- enriched Advance: "It's clever milk."Why add fish oil to milk? Let us consult Professor Lord Robert Winston, or at least his new St Ivel's press release. "Children of today do not have enough Omega 3 in their diet," he explains. "The largest source of this nutrient is oily fish and, as many mums have found, this food is not popular with children. What has been lacking is an easier way for families to get more Omega 3 in a more user-friendly format."According to Dairy Crest (the company to which many mums are already indebted for its Homer Simpson Raspberry "Doh"-Nut-flavoured milk), "Anecdotal evidence from teachers and parents indicates that increasing intake of Omega 3 may improve learning and concentration for some children." Anecdotal evidence is the kind of evidence not considered adequate by the government's National Institute for Clinical Excellence. And "some children"? How many would that be? Neither Dairy Crest nor Lord Winston elaborates, in this press release anyway, on which children might belong to this category. That may be because they are referring to the children with behavioural or learning disorders such as dyspraxia or dyslexia who are, as yet, the only ones who have been shown - anecdotally - to benefit from supplements of Omega 3.In a Durham study featured in the 2004 BBC programme, A Child of Our Time, for example, which was presented by Winston, all the children were selected because they were not fulfilling their potential. There is, then, no body of evidence which I am aware of that drinking St Ivel's Advance will make a normal child "clever". Or even enhance its "concentration and learning". Even if the evidence were there, there are, of course, many ways of consuming adequate quantities of Omega 3, from eating a balanced diet to buying rival Omega 3-enriched brands, such as supplemented orange juice or eggs.Still, a few additional glasses of Omega 3-enriched milk are unlikely to do any harm to a child of average build on a balanced diet. It is surely the wellbeing of Professor Lord Robert Winston that we should be concerned about. While I can find nothing in the code of conduct for peers that actually prohibits a sideline as a milkman, there must be the possibility that next time Lord Winston rises to his feet to say something wise about science, his audience will struggle to blot out the image of him caressing the lid of his St Ivel's milk bottle and thus have difficulty in following what Lord Winston has previously described as "the quiet and mature arguments so frequent during ministerial questions in the Lords".Some may even see a potential conflict between the peer's promotion of St Ivel's Advance and the injunction, in the Lords code of conduct, to remember the principle of (a), Selflessness: "Holders of public office should take decisions solely in terms of the public interest. They should not do so in order to gain financial or other material benefits for themselves, their family, or their friends." And the principle of (b), Integrity: "Holders of public office should not place themselves under any financial or other obligation to outside individuals or organisations that might influence them in the performance of their official duties."The code also asks holders of public office to remember that they "are accountable for their decisions and actions to the public and must submit themselves to whatever scrutiny is appropriate to their office". No doubt Lord Winston will, at some point, explain why he chose to throw his clinical weight behind St Ivel's Advance, and reassure the distributors of stupid milk that he has nothing against their non-Omega 3-enhanced product.In a chamber that still contains the convicted perjurer Jeffrey Archer, Tony Blair's flatmate Lord Falconer, and any number of disreputable, dim and unworthy beneficiaries of political patronage, we should not, I know, get disproportionately worked up about Winston's new sideline. Perhaps we should even be thankful that he did not decide to endorse Simpsons doughnut-flavoured milk ("bought by parents who want to smuggle milk and calcium into their children's diet",) or Utterly Butterly ("appeals to people who don't take life too seriously"). In an upper chamber where millionaire donors do so well, the pressure to behave in a nakedly self-interested way must be intense.Whatever the thinking behind his celebrity endorsement, Winston's obvious indifference to its more unappealing aspect only adds to the evidence - admittedly anecdotal - that Blair's placeman-enriched, clever Lords, with enhanced powers of concentration, is turning out to be as insufferably self-serving as the old, half-witted version. Now that they are gone, you realise that the one thing to be said for men such as Lord Longford, the late and unlamented Marquess of Bath and Lord Clancarty, who used to believe in flying saucers, is that their imprimatur on a bottle of milk, had it ever come to pass, would have been its kiss of death. Many mums like that in a peer.