As well as a very encouraging article about sex over 60, the forthcoming issue of Saga magazine features an admiring interview with its cover-boy, Michael Howard. "The recent career of Michael Howard is an example to us all," begins the writer, Martin Vander Weyer. And not only, he explains to Saga readers, to people beginning "to weigh up the pros and cons of easing toward retirement". It is the "re-emergence" of Michael Howard, he says, that should inspire "anyone who has ever felt that the best is past and the odds are impossibly stacked against a revival of fortune".  Not to mention anyone who has just lost two byelections, seen their accent ridiculed, and now suspects their former supporters may be dropping away. Mr Howard may well, in these new circumstances, be feeling that the best part of his leadership is behind him. He will have noticed that, with Lord Tebbit out mischief-making while Mr Blair celebrates his 10 glorious years, the odds are impossibly stacked against a revival of fortune. That is not to say he can no longer make a useful contribution. Maybe he could clean behind the fridge while the lovely and still sought-after Sandra is out on her modelling assignments.  Nor is this message of hope springing eternal the only lesson to be drawn from the Saga piece. There is a lesson here for journalists, too. Given the built-in obsolescence of modern Tory leaders, it would probably be as well for anyone interviewing one, and working with a lead time of more than a week, to assume that by the time the article is published that leader will have been pitilessly evicted. Or, at any rate, challenged. Or at the very least, transformed, overnight, from party saviour, to embarrassing loser.  Yesterday, after witnessing Howard's dismal performance in the post-Butler debate, the Daily Mail's sketchwriter, Quentin Letts, lamented the way Howard had "shrivelled like a punctured birthday balloon" when confronted with an uppish Blair and an unusually hyper-active audience. "Mr Howard was thrown by this mob. His speech yesterday was a disaster."  Even taking into account the sensation - no doubt familiar to fellow Saga readers - of time accelerating with the advancing years, it seems only yesterday that this same Quentin Letts was celebrating this same Tory leader's prowess at the dispatch box. In fact, it turns out to be a full eight months since he described the first Howard-Blair parliamentary bout as "better and bloodier than Giant Haystacks versus Big Daddy ... It was impossible to be in that chamber and not feel a surge of excitement that an element of parity has been restored." He was not the only one to applaud the arrival of Mr Howard, the party's third deliverer in six years. In the Independent, Bruce Anderson dismissed the "myxie rabbit" as he tastefully called Iain Duncan Smith, and hailed his replacement's "incisive, forensic style of argument". Simon Heffer also liked Mr Howard for being "forensically minded", and predicted that, on television, "he will look relentless, even threatening."  Alas, the forensic style seems to have gone out of fashion, and even as some of us suspected at the time of his election, being relentless, even threatening on television is not much use if you have no ideas to be relentless about, and still say "pippel". As for the famous, lawyerly ratiocination: it has had a perplexing, most unfortunate tendency to go missing whenever it was needed, which, with so many judicial whitewashes coming out nowadays, has been quite often. In short, like Hague and IDS, Howard has been a terrible mistake. After the byelections, Simon Heffer observed that all the Tories' energetic campaigning had "achieved nothing. After a change of leader and various new policies, their whole strategy appears flawed."  Who's next? The conservatives would seem to have a choice of some keen young fellows called Cameron and Osborne, of whom no one outside politics has ever heard, and some keen, slightly older men, both journalists, who are able and may thus be a bit scary to the cautious Conservative party member, who generally goes for something more sinister, comical, or bald. But with the new fashion for disposable leaders, perhaps it doesn't matter much. Any Tories dismayed to find that the latest model has already, irreparably broken down, should remember what the washing machine repair man always says: What do you expect? It's almost a year old, innit? 'Ardly worf mending. You want to go out and get a new one.  If William Hague managed four years, IDS two, and Howard is beset by mockery and despair after only eight months, it follows that his successor will barely have long enough to get his - or her! - teeth fixed, learn to say multiculturalism, and get themselves interviewed by Saga magazine before Lord Tebbit, or similar, starts oiling the wheels of the gurney. Like the modern washing machine, the new system is awfully wasteful and very poor value. Before long, the mountains of defunct Tory leaders could present a real environmental hazard. But that's progress for you.<B>Why the SWP likes a bit of discipline</B>This week's obituaries of Paul Foot have been a reminder of the British left's debt to the British public school system. So many leading opponents of privilege appear to have been shaped by early experiences in the house system that it seems probable the left can only suffer from recent attempts to replace traditional, character-building brutality with elements of human kindness. Still, the reintroduction of house points, uniforms and other Bunterish trimmings to the state system is promising; and the songs of Radiohead's Thom Yorke are proof that even a moderately strict public school, such as Abingdon, may engender lifelong mistrust of the establishment. Yorke's school seems to have suffered from nothing much worse than a bad case of rugby and a headmaster "with ridiculous sideburns", but the Radiohead boys are still warbling furiously about "bastard headmaster/i'm not going back/children taught to kill/to tear themselves to bits/on playing fields". Tessa Jowell has had much to say, recently, about the merits of competitive sport, and it is pleasant to think that the main beneficiaries of such discipline may not be her own party, but the SWP.<B>But who will be Alastair's friend?</B>Welcome though it is, as a contribution to harmonious race relations, I wonder if the Commission for Racial Equality's report on friendship goes far enough. The exercise of totting up black and Asian friends only emphasised the poverty of my friends collection, bereft, as it is, of any Welsh friends, friends on remand, estate agent friends, stockbroker friends, traveller friends, car mechanic friends, fat cat friends, sex industry friends, spin doctor friends and friends who are also baronets. To name just a few of the kinds of friends I have yet to meet. How, as Trevor Phillips has asked, can we avoid being misled by stereotypes, and avoid feelings of hostility, if we have no first-hand experience? With schoolchildren, one can imagine methods of enforcement. But how will adults find the time, or the opportunity to ingratiate themselves with unfamiliar people they have not been introduced to? Friendship leave, enforced in the same way as jury service?  A better solution - as so often these days - might be a lottery, in which each of us is randomly allocated 20 new friends. After which it remains only to build those close and lasting bonds from which Phillips' dream of a fully integrated Britain can evolve. Swapping and trading in friends will not be permitted. After all, someone, somewhere, is going to get Alastair Campbell.