After a number of recent battles, in which quite a few hundred people have been slaughtered, the sensitive politician might want to avoid the use of bellicose imagery. At least, until the real war in Iraq is over. Tony Blair, on the other hand, can think of no better way with which to emphasise the violence of his latest volte-face. Such is his disgust for the word "referendum", with its connotations of weedy debates and passive consultation (not to mention innocuous "tidying up"), that he prefers to present it as a rough, tough, gloves-off fight until the best man wins. "Let the issue be put. Let battle be joined." If this seems a repellently stupid, and, in the circumstances, staggeringly tasteless choice of words, we should perhaps consider whether Blair, the born-again warrior, is able to control himself. In Plan of Attack, his illuminating and persuasive new account of the approach to the Iraq war, Bob Woodward reminds us how George Bush flattered our prime minister, after the latter had pledged British troops, telling Alastair Campbell: "Your man has got cojones." Afterwards, Bush would call this the "the cojones meeting". More recently, in an interview with Woodward, the president apparently recalled: "And, of course, these Brits don't know what cojones are."  Assuming Bush was referring to our linguistic limitations rather than to some flaw in the national biology, he is, of course, quite wrong. We have read Ernest Hemingway. Cojones is the Spanish word for testicles. Moreover, the heavily cojoned hero of Hemingway's For Whom the Bell Tolls is taken for a Scot. In attributing cojones to Blair, Bush is saying that our prime minister, for all that he may resemble a not particularly vigorous 50-year-old who likes looking at beach volleyball players, is actually a heroic kind of person, a man who might easily have volunteered for the Spanish civil war, or fought bulls in the ring, or enjoyed any number of the life-threatening sports Hemingway considered truly virile: "It takes more cojones to be a sportsman where death is a closer party to the game" (Death in the Afternoon, 1932).  Not the least alarming revelation, in Woodward's account of Bush's covert preparations for war, is the strutting, sparring manner in which his jowly advisers would urge one another on to walk the walk. Donald Rumsfeld advocated moments when you have to "look people in the eye". Bush duly "looked Blair in the eye". (Not to be outdone, Blair looked "Bush back in the eye".) Karl Rove, working on Bush's image, lists among desired presidential qualities, "Strong Leader, Bold Action, Big Ideas, Peace in World". Although it's not always as dignified as that.  At a crucial meeting in December 2002, in which he attempted to convince Bush that the evidence for WMD was compelling, George Tenet, the CIA director, threw his arms up in the air and twice declared, "It's a slam dunk case!" (I understand, in the absence of Woodward's guidance, that this is a forceful and decisive basketball shot, meaning, when used by the head of the CIA, that there is no question that the WMD evidence is adequate.)  Aside from its flattering new cover depicting the pardners Bush and Blair - in contrast to the all-American line-up on the US jacket - the British edition of Plan of Attack depicts this country's engagement in Bush's war as little more than a tactical requirement. In early attack plans, drawn up by General Franks in December 2001, British involvement was presented as optional. Later, of course, it was thanks to Blair that the US went through the motions of seeking UN endorsement for its war, but only because Bush needed Blair to stay in office, where he could proclaim loyalty and support. "If his government went down, Bush would not only lose his chief ally but it would strengthen Saddam. Imagine the headlines! Plus, Bush reasoned, he would be blamed. It would be a double whammy."  So worried was Bush about the PR disaster of being forced, in the absence of Blair, into the unilateral, "imperial option", that he called him, offering to find another role for British forces, an opt-out as "peacekeepers or something. I would rather go alone than have your government fall." Blair, the  buen hombre, is recorded as replying: "I said I'm with you. I mean it."  If Bush and Woodward's account of these leader-to-leader conversations can be trusted, Blair was not so much the president's poodle, as his little drummer boy, free with declarations of eternal fealty - "I said, I'm with you" - for which he would be rewarded with compliments of the cojones variety, or other forms of presidential indulgence. But for all that Bush needed him, the relationship remained unequal. Demeaningly so. When it came to a second resolution, Blair had to plead with Bush: "Blair said he needed the favour. Please." It was graciously granted. After Blair's successful war speech in the commons, Bush is supposed to have called him, and rhapsodised   "leaders" - like themselves - "who take strong stands and define their missions".  Exactly how much of this sub-Hemingway posturing actually occurred between the two men, neither of whom has ever been in combat, it is hard to say. Some of it is so shaming that, if untrue, Blair should make haste to deny it. A few, utterly implausible expressions, such as "whip counters" and wanting to "win strong", suggest we should not believe every word. But the cross-my-heart avowals are all too convincing. And Campbell's earlier reports of the dumb, virile fun of war summits (where he, too, got recognised as a man), make it easy to believe now in Woodward's extended account of the eyeballing and bonding and slam dunking which seem to have constituted, for Bush and his allies, an updated version of coating themselves in woad.  Today, although slighted by the blood brother who persuaded him to commit 45,000 British troops to war, Blair still appears to cherish his status as a man whose cojones are so surpassingly huge that he can do no wrong. It takes balls to walk all over the cabinet. It takes balls to contradict yourself like this. It takes balls to fly to Bermuda when there's a war on. Maybe he should go off and edit Nuts magazine. <B>Lies, damn lies and EU myths</B>One reason for a referendum, according to the prime minister, is to expose the disgraceful "nonsense-myths" circulated by eurosceptics. Among other fictions, he itemised "being forced to drive on the right, the Germans taking over our nuclear weapons; and, no doubt, the shape of our bananas, too." Some of us would have been still more reassured if, in this list of appalling slurs and malicious inventions, Blair had confirmed that a draft EU directive on gender equality will not, if it is adopted, result in a massive rise in the cost of women's car insurance. For the idea that young women, who drive more safely than young men, should have to pay the same as the sex that accounts for 98% of dangerous driving, is surely quite as absurd as the regulation of banana dimensions.  But when one remembers the mischievous propagandists who are keen to damage the EU at any cost, it becomes obvious that they, and not a social affairs commissioner called Anna Diamantopoulou, must be responsible. For if adopted, her proposal must be a precedent for the introduction of strict, anti-discriminatory regulation in every other area of insurance, with non-smokers stumping up the same premiums as smokers, croquet players paying as much as skiers.  Next time we hear from the improbable "Anna Diamantopoulou", let us remember Blair's assurances, and resolve not to believe everything we read in the newspapers.