Barbara Cassani, the American woman leading Britain's bid to stage the Olympics, says that there is absolutely no truth in a report, run prominently in the Daily Telegraph this week, that she had been invited to dinner with Mr Blair, and found, "to be frank, he wasn't that bright". The newspaper alleged that Cassani continued, "He took an interest in what I was saying, and has this ability to make it seem as if he cares, but he didn't seem particularly knowledgeable about anything ... his responses to my questions were slow." She is also supposed to have noted the prime minister's very marked enthusiasm for the siting of beach volleyball on an area of Whitehall conveniently adjacent to his office window (a "masterstroke" of planning, he recently called it, in a public, somewhat heavy-handed appeal to the floating phwooaar! vote).  It is unfortunate for Cassani, whose lawyers are demanding a full and complete apology from the Telegraph, that these alleged observations on Blair's mental debility should have appeared so soon after the singer George Michael described what happened after he, too, accepted Blair's invitation to dinner in 1997. George said he found him "a really nice guy ... What worried me most was that he didn't seem the smartest man at the table."  A bit steep, you might think, coming from a man whose boon companions include Geri Halliwell and her dog, Harry. Then again, Michael's comments only echo Doris Lessing's verdict. Last year she said, "He believes in magic. That if you say a thing, it is true. I think he's not very bright in some ways." And not very cultivated either, according to VS Naipaul, who has blamed Blair for imposing an "aggressively plebeian culture that celebrates itself for being plebeian".  No doubt Blair will accept Cassani's assurance that she in fact holds him "in very high regard". It would be difficult to find a new Olympic champion now, and, besides, even if she had said it (which she didn't!) being called stupid would probably make a nice change from being called mad or, more recently, moribund. Last year Blair was repeatedly diagnosed as mentally ill, not only by amateur clinicians such as Matthew Parris, who found evidence of someone "stark, staring mad", but by the concerned professionals quoted in Prospect and the New Statesman, who, between them, detected evidence of the psychopathic, the delusional, and other interesting varieties of pathological behaviour.  For some reason - possibly because so many powerful calmatives are now available - the allegations of insanity do not seem to have prompted any talk of lawyers and apologies and setting the record straight. Even though there was every reason to think this supposed lunatic would have passed all the tests - such as spelling "world" backwards and   counting in sevens - used to establish mental illness by NHS psychiatrists.  It is difficult, on the other hand, to see how the prime minister could now defend himself against Michael's and Lessing's observations. Even if he sat an intelligence test. The contention that he is not mad, so much as dull-witted, is so apt an explanation for all the idiotic things he has done to squander his majority and compromise his reputation - from bodging reform of the Lords to falling out with the judges, from befriending Carole Caplin to alienating half of Europe - that it seems extraordinary it has not been advanced more often, and more forcefully.  Admittedly we are familiar with the line that the prime minister is less intelligent than his wife. And less intelligent than his old leadership rivals Gordon Brown and Robin Cook. And less intelligent, as a public schoolboy, educated within an inch of his life, than the brilliant, grammar-school boys with Oxbridge firsts who used to dominate Labour politics. And less intelligent than the political advisers whose job it is to write his   speeches and tell him about the third way and dream up "eye-catching initiatives". Even so, one took it pretty much for granted that he was not actually dim. On the contrary. "Bright" was the word generally applied, when his grin first appeared glinting on the horizon.  If he did not always dazzle, rhetorically or in mental agility, then one supposed it was because Blair, being so modern, saw the importance, in this deeply intellectual-averse country, of demonstrating the common touch. Hence all the easy-to-understand turns about glasses being half-full, about the smiles on sick kiddies' faces and reverse gears and the surpassing loveliness of the beach volleyball player. Only recently has it seemed possible that this persistent vegetative state might be involuntary. Blair really hasn't got any ideas left. He really was impressed by the football-mad thug, Alastair Campbell. Left to himself he writes speeches such as his hysterical Sedgefield apologia, in which he justified invading Iraq on the basis that this was what he decided to do at the time. "Iraq in March 2003 was an immensely difficult judgment. It was divisive because it was difficult." Not so: simple things can be divisive too. It was divisive because a great many people thought he was plain wrong, and the evidence he supplied to persuade them subsequently turned out to be false.  In the absence of coherent policies, plans, arguments, the word "judgment" seems to appeal to Blair as synonymous with rightness. Or with justice. Which, of course, it would be, if he were God. In an interview for Saga magazine last year, he said, "When I was young, I paid more regard to intellect than judgment. As I've got older, I pay more regard to judgment than intellect." As if the two were alternatives. Since then, anyway, Blair seems to have moved on again. What he really pays regard to, these days, is beach volleyball. <B>Save time - read about TV</B>If only Sex and the City could end, finally and for ever, a bit more often. What with the contributions, for and against, from top career women including Mrs Conrad Black, the lively debates about how far it has, or has not changed/reflected women's sex lives, and the continuation of the story, by means of Amanda Platell, in the Daily Mail, the obsequies have been as enjoyable as they are instructive. With the end of this series, it became obvious that you could have missed every one of its scores of episodes without ever paying the price in terms of ignorance, followed by social exclusion and low self-esteem. Now that broadsheet as well as tabloid newspapers are disposed to treat television characters as no less newsworthy for being completely made up - rather more so, in fact, since they are prettier and live more eventful lives - nobody, even people without televisions, need be at a loss during those brief but challenging periods when a programme becomes essential viewing, before it goes on to join Thirtysomething, Cold Feet and Friends in televisual oblivion.   It is the work of a moment to absorb a tribute, or critique dedicated to Carrie and the three imaginary friends who have helped the shoe-crazy figment through good scripts and bad, yet such summaries offer instant authority should you suddenly find yourself lashed to a watercooler and forced to contribute to a discussion of, say, That Controversial Ending. Was the made-up baby obsession a patronising sell-out or a fair   reflection of what the average non-existent young baggage really wants once she reaches a certain, invented age? The drift towards fiction has its compensations. Anyone who read, rather than watched Sex and the City, Ally McBeal, Friends, Seinfeld, Frasier, Cheers and Thirtysomething will have managed to stay quite as fascinating as the genuine enthusiast, while effectively extending their life by around six weeks.