A few years ago, Susie Orbach launched a campaign called Antidote, with the aim of bringing "emotional literacy" into British public life. Tessa Jowell was a signatory. Antidote's idea, Orbach explained, was to "widen the political vocabulary so that emotions are open, not hidden". To judge by last week's political performances, Antidote has succeeded marvellously. Not only were we treated to displays of unrestrained exultation, we were addressed by the prime minister in the language that marriage guidance counsellors use on their clients. "What this does," said Blair, after receiving his second, adequately ornate apology, "is allow us to draw a line and move on." The prime minister's spokesman, John Cleese to his Robin Skynner, also hinted at feelings that run too deep for triumphalist press conferences: "It is time, as he said, to move on." It can't be long before they collaborate on a self-help book: Wars and How to Survive Them. Meanwhile, Alastair Campbell also wants us to move on, and Tessa Jowell, once a psychiatric social worker, has hailed Hutton for enabling the Kelly family to "achieve closure". And urged the BBC to "move on". It is a measure of her professional skills that some patients already feel ready to comply. "We've got to move on," agrees BBC2's Jane Root.  What, however, is to become of those of us who, were we to lie on    Blair's couch, might describe ourselves as having "some work to do"? Or as "stuck"? Or even, in some extreme cases, as victims of recurrent nightmares, for whom it seems that the hideous flashbacks of Blair and Campbell's grinning faces will never, ever go away? Since Hutton, I am assured, it is not unusual for people to feel hurt and let down, isolated and confused, unable to trust. We may feel that the world is an unfair   place; so much so that there is no point in voting next time round. Will we ever learn to love again?  For anyone who feels similarly at a loss, and in the absence of further guidance from the Downing Street therapy unit, perhaps I could recommend Dr Ann Macaskill's helpful book, Heal the Hurt: How to Forgive and Move On (Sheldon Press, £6.99). Dr Macaskill understands how hard it can be to get over things,   even when the prime minister, his pet bully and the culture secretary are all telling you it's essential. "In the course of my professional life," she says, "I have seen many people harbouring hurts that they have carried for years." But we should ask ourselves if the pain is worth it. "Is holding a grudge, nursing a hurt, really worth the associated pain, the feeling of being stuck in the past, unable to move on?"   In all probability, she says, the person who hurt you is "getting on with their life, seldom giving you a second thought". Blair, for instance, is already on his next inquiry. Campbell is writing a sports column. Jowell is busy telling everyone off.  Forgiveness, Macaskill explains, is a process we can complete for ourselves, even in the absence of any apology - but "we have to be willing to work at it". She suggests various strategies for people who want to move on, such as thinking of all the good times you had with the perpetrator of your pain. You might, for example, want to think about Blair's promise not to introduce tuition fees. His vision of a reformed House of Lords. The thing about being his brother's keeper.  For some people, of course, such therapy may only bring up further pain. Why, they may feel, do politicians arrogate the language of counselling, and with such patent insincerity? For they must know that "moving on" is not, according to the therapists who coined the expression, to be achieved overnight, but only after the laborious contemplation of what you are leaving behind. That "closure", even if it were a desirable condition and not the most abject of counselling cliches, is not something you can claim for another person, family or institution. Do they perhaps feel that saying, "It's time to move on" sounds more attractive than what they mean, ie: "I've won, so bugger off"? If so, we can only conclude, in the face of such self-deception, that many, many years of unflinching self-examination lie ahead.   <B>Rennie, the BBC's cure-all</B><BR>  Who is Dame Rennie Fritchie, the woman whose name now constitutes the government's all-purpose answer to any questions about the chairmanship of the BBC? Interrogated on Monday about the selection procedure, Tessa Jowell repeatedly assured the Commons that Dame Rennie would see us right. She would be "guarantor for the fairness of the process". And who, asked one suspicious Tory, would write Dame Rennie's guarantee? Why, Tessa retorted, "Those will all be matters for Dame Rennie." In the culture secretary's circles, you gather, Rennie Fritchie, the commissioner for public appointments, passes for the very fount of probity and disinterest. Or, as Tessa put it: "Given   that Dame Rennie Fritchie has undertaken to discharge the oversight responsibility, we have to be confident of the enhanced independence of the process."  If lamentably few people had ever heard of this prodigy before Jowell's announcement, it is scarcely the fault of Dame Rennie, who, it turns out, prides herself on being a "portfolio worker", for whom being a four-day-a-week commissioner (for a well-deserved £126,000 per annum) is but one of a vast array of positions, honours and emoluments too long to list here. Suffice it to say that she is also Northern Ireland's commissioner for public appointments, a "consultant on Strategy and Leadership", honorary visiting professor with a   chair in creative leadership at York University, non-executive director of the Stroud and Swindon Building Society, pro chancellor of Southampton University, a "much sought-after coach and mentor", author of Resolving Conflicts in Organisations and inventor of the "wild west view of consultancy".  Even as she bestrides the public and commercial sectors like a colossus, Dame Rennie finds time to share her thoughts on leadership, assertiveness, time management and creative thinking. Some indication of the quality of guidance she might, if called upon, be able to offer the privy councillors in their search for a replacement chairman, emerges in a recent lecture on "leadership and partnership". The leader's role, says Dame Rennie, is "to choose the right thing - to show the way, set the direction of travel". She continues: "It seems to me that    having the ability to fly at 30,000ft, to see the biggest overarching picture, to know when to drop down to 20,000ft, 10,000ft and where to land and walk is a prerequisite for choosing the right thing." Having walked about, and also, perhaps, checked into an executive suite, unpacked his or her case and investigated the minibar, the leader must also listen to "the five unspoken employee requests", such as "Acknowledge the greatness within me"; and know how to learn from his or her misjudgments. "As leaders we  enjoy success but we  learn from mistakes." Unless, of course, we work for the BBC, in which case we are  forced to resign.  Dame Rennie illustrates the leader's need for Balance with a poem of her own: If Life Is a Circus: Who's Laughing? "With the children a juggler I became/Kids, work, home, no two days the same   ... Now in my 50s, I finally hold the ring/In my three-ring circus balance is everything."  There are practical hints, too, acquired from "my own Leadership Roles", which may be of interest to anyone applying for the BBC chairmanship. For example, draw a square, divide it into four, and fill each box with a list of "allies, opponents, bedfellows and enemies". Here's another precept: "Human beings may appear to be separate, but our connections are deep and we are inseparable." Candidates might also wish to memorise the 13 leadership principles Rennie picked up from Colin Powell. These include "It can be done!", "Get mad, then get over it!", and "Don't let adverse facts stand in the way of a good decision." Does the last one still seem such a good idea? That, Jowell would no doubt remind us, is entirely a matter for Dame Rennie.