Launching his Big Conversation last week, Tony Blair issued a little warning to those enemies of the state who would, he predicted, rubbish this "real debate" about the future of our nation. "There are obvious risks in this. The policy choices are hard. The cynics will sneer." And if the cynics did sneer, even before the exercise had properly started, those responsible for naming Blair's great mission after a recent management consultancy wheeze at the BBC should perhaps take some of the blame. Almost a week later, with around 50 contributions on the website, the least cynical eavesdropper would have to admit that conversation is, to put it mildly, stilted. A typical participant begins: "I am so proud to have voted Labour with my first ever vote a few years ago. Everywhere I look I see new cars, wealth, opportunities, investment and most favourable mortgage rates."  Fellow chatterers do not so much reply to these sallies, as attempt to outstrip them in flattery. Caroline, for instance, speaks highly of British trains. "I experience a reasonably good rail service as I commute to work in London. When I've needed a doctor or hospital service, the NHS has always delivered the best services quickly." Other contributors, such as Carrie, contrast their current bliss with the hardship and evil of the old, Thatcherite days. "I can remember when I was young growing up with Conservatives and my mum had to work every hour to try and keep me and my sister and there was no childcare facilities."  Another contributor writes: "In the old days, before the glorious Revolution, London was not the beautiful city that we know today. It was a dark, dirty, miserable place where hardly anybody had enough to eat and where hundreds and thousands of poor people had no boots on their feet and not even a roof to sleep under..."  Actually, that comes from the party's history textbook in Orwell's 1984. Still, the intended effect is surely not that different from this Big Conversation contribution from Jayne, a teacher: "Have people forgotten the poll tax, the massive interest rates and all the sleaze of that administration?" Or Ian's memories of the 80s when, "I wallowed on the dole. I was in despair, forever chasing Tory dreams - 'get on your bike', 'woolly hats' etc, etc. Ten years after voting Tony Blair in, I am now in a very well-paid job, I have a property here in the UK and a property in Tenerife (Spain). Things have certainly 'got better' for me and all my friends who have similarly suffered in the past and have excelled under the New Labour parliament."  Naturally, those running the Big Conversation have realised that, for the sake of credibility, these impeccably loyal effusions need to be balanced with some constructive criticism. A P O'Neill, for example, pleads for "many more party political broadcasts on TV and radio so we can hear directly from our leaders what they really think, what the problems really involve and how they can be sorted out... The TV and radio should be obliged to carry short government broadcasts each night so that a real debate could be founded on proper information and facts."  And if I can join in the Big Conversation for a second, why stop there? Ideally, a telescreen in every flat would broadcast party news continually, untroubled by the media cynics and pundits whose carping seem to have upset several contributors to the Big Conversation. Imagine bulletins from Iraq that were uninterrupted by unwelcome equivocation about civilian casualties, brutality, WMDs, but ran along the following lines: "I am authorised to say that the action we are now reporting may well bring the war within measurable distance of its end."  In reality, the war in Iraq is a subject the Big Conversationalists have yet, at the time of writing, to engage with (those Conversationalists, that is, whose contributions have been selected for the website). Ditto international relations, George Bush, terrorism, the EU constitution, drugs, asylum, foundation hospitals, parliamentary democracy, waiting lists, council tax, prisons, the House of Lords, the new supreme court, identity cards and the state of London Underground. On the other hand, experiences of the NHS mentioned here have been, without exception, positive: "the care... was second to none". On student fees, there is just the one contribution, from Alex, 19: "I think tuition fees are important because they make people realise the value of education."  A foreigner consulting this website to enhance her understanding of this country could only conclude, like the visitors to Stalin's wholesome Potemkin villages, that all is for the best under this best of all possible administrations. Or, as Andy Saxon, who was invited to contribute to the site, put it: "I think Tony Blair's got an impossible job but he does it well."  There are, inevitably, various hopeless personal petitions of the sort traditionally reserved for the attention of constituency MPs - who are, presumably, overjoyed to see so many monomaniacs diverted out of their surgeries and into this new bores' paradise. Labour has promised to consider comments from all such supplicants, who currently include: a man who says the NHS dentists near him are full; a woman preoccupied with the A36 bypass; a man who wants classical music on the underground; a woman who says we need legal protection for pagans. So far the only substantial and consistent source of complaint to emerge on the site is anti-social behaviour; a problem which, since it reflects worst on the parents and children responsible, can hardly be attributed to government incompetence.  But the Conversation has only just begun. Perhaps not many people have written in yet. Perhaps its unnerving tone of virtually unqualified approval is not so much the achievement of Labour's thought police, but the result of a complete lack of popular interest. We must hope that in time, with sustained promotion, this "real debate" will cease to resemble a letters page from a pre-1989 edition of Pravda. If not, the only illuminating thing about Blair's Big Conversation might well be its unsettling echoes of Orwell's Big Brother. And then those cynics would have a field day.<B>Little people can dump gongs too</B>Yasmin Alibhai-Brown ended her announcement that she plans to return her MBE with a confession that she is not quite sure how one goes about it. Clearly she does not have the good fortune to live in Islington, where the the clatter of unwanted CBEs, MBEs and OBEs recently became so deafening that the council issued each household with a handy honours recyling bin, in which unwanted medals can simply be left on the doorstep every Monday alongside the boxes containing empty Chardonnay bottles and assorted printed refuse. The honours are then melted down and the profits used to start up call centres in former outposts of the British empire.  But as Alibhai-Brown implied, it may be some time before everyone shares the "self-contempt" that she now feels at having accepted her honour. With a perceptiveness reminiscent of Leona Helmsley's, who remarked - as a millionairess - that "only little people pay taxes", the Independent columnist noted that, "It is important to remember that the little people are often in the lists which come out - nurses, community activists, dinner ladies - for whom such recognition is priceless..."  What can be done to bridge this gap; to make these endearingly humble dinner ladies and nurses more receptive to the urgings of that latter-day Jiminy Cricket, Benjamin Zephaniah? Maybe, if like Zephaniah and Alibhai-Brown, the grateful nonentities could be offered recognition of a different kind - a newspaper platform, for example, in which to simultaneously advertise and    repudiate the state's recognition of their achievements - they, too, might be encouraged to snub the authorities? Although they cannot, as a general rule, be allowed a whole article each, there seems no reason why in future, the New Year honours lists should not be accompanied by yet more elite, honours-disdained/returned lists, in which conscience-stricken little people can experience, for a moment, just what it feels like to be big.