B>The following correction was printed in the Guardian's Corrections and Clarifications column, Thursday November 20 2003</B><BR><BR>In the column below, sub-headlined ' Presidents and the right to protest', we may unintentionally have given the impression that Jiang Zemin is still the Chinese president. He was succeeded by Hu Jintao in November 2002.  <BR><BR>  <B><HR size="1"></HR></B>  <BR><BR> Here are some things that people think. The majority of people, anyway. People think that Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire is one of the best books ever written. People approve of the reintroduction of capital punishment (lethal injection, for preference). People want fox hunting banned. Their favourite song is Bohemian Rhapsody. People believe in ghosts and are in favour of identity cards. Their favourite meal is fish and chips and they feel sure GM food is a very bad thing. Almost half of them don't think the MMR jab is safe. People underestimate the hygiene complications of preparing a Christmas turkey. They have never heard of the European Constitution. They think parents have the right to know the name and address of any sex offender in the neighbourhood. They think parental selection of a baby's gender is so awful it should be banned. Mercifully, for those who deviate from the majority position on most of the above, the public view does not have to be emulated, or obeyed. We are not subject to its moronic line on literature, music or the paranormal. On gender selection, however, the feelings of the mob are to be enforced. When Suzy Leather, chairwoman of the Human Fertilisation and Embryology Authority, explained why this body, after a year's review, now advocates a ban on sex selection, the main reason adduced for the decision was that the majority of people say they don't like the idea. Or as Leather put it, there is "a substantial public consensus against sex selection for social reasons". In this area, then, the conduct of your private life is to be directed by public consultation backed by a Mori poll. Unless, that is, you have the energy and cash to defy the public fiat: sex selection is legally available, at a price, at private clinics in America and across the Channel.  Quite why "people" should be so against this ostensibly not very wicked expression of a preference is not easily understood. If people had concluded, having completed the relevant research, that gender selection might result in a great preponderance of girls or boys, or an increased number of abortions or incidence of neglect, then one might sympathise with their fears, when polled. The deputy chairman of the HFEA, Tom Baldwin, has said that much of the opposition sprang from "widespread hostility", and from anxieties about a "slippery slope". So it is not because sex selection was found wanting by the HFEA experts, you gather, so much as to assuage the public's nightmares about designer babies or hundreds of mini-Bin Ladens (quite understandable if you watch a lot of late-night television) that women such as Nicola Chenery, of Plymouth, who really wanted a daughter after her four boys, should now be prevented from having sex selection by IVF at a clinic in Spain. If this decisive body of technophobes had got their way a bit earlier, Chenery's twin baby girls would never have been born. How fortunate, in fact, that Mori polls were not in charge around the time IVF was invented. Ditto blood transfusion and heart transplants.  But it's true: slippery slopes can be awfully worrying. What, for example, are the implications of the HFEA's deferral to public opinion in a country where politicians customarily go to great lengths to avoid doing what the public actually wants? Should we now look forward to seeing paedophiles in the stocks, zero fuel tax, the prohibition of speed limits, a quick exit from Europe and the immediate expulsion of all asylum seekers?  The HFEA's recourse to public sentiment suggests that consultation should go much further than that. Most of us, after all, have some acquaintance with the issues of crime and of tax-paying, some opinion on public services. In the case of sex selection, there can be no recourse to experience or, even, to folk wisdom. It's a question many poll respondents might never have considered before - unless you count inclining, secretly, to one sex or the other.  If fertility experts on the Clapham omnibus can decide policy on gender selection as well as the outcome of Pop Idol, there is no reason why they should not be invited to rule on other scientific advances likely to prompt substantial ethical debate. Those clinicians currently hoping to attempt a facial transplant, for example, and the few gravely disfigured individuals who have expressed interest in the operation, may need to consider not only the profound questions of identity involved in such a procedure, but whether the public will, once again, be so utterly outraged by the affront to nature that doctors, ethicists and prospective patients must all bow to its opinion. <BR><BR><B>Presidents and the right to protest</B><BR><BR>Isn't it time we had Jiang Zemin round? It's been ages and on his last stay, thanks to Robin Cook's insistence on sparing the feelings of the Chinese president, he hardly got to meet anyone. Quite possibly he went home with the idea that the United Kingdom is, leaving aside 1,000-year-old eggs and the occasional peasouper, just like China. A ruthless police state in which any dissent is either concealed from visitors or suppressed, if necessary by violence. But after George Bush's visit, that should all be different, shouldn't it? Even those who maintain that Bush is the vilest ruler of the most evil empire that ever existed must concede that, if his visit helps restore the right to peaceful protest that Cook suddenly withdrew in 1991, it can't have been all bad. Next time Jiang comes to stay, the Metropolitan police commissioner Sir John Stevens will want to make sure that he sees the welcoming Tibetan flags, banners and T-shirts instead of having all the human rights demonstrators obscured from the presidential view or dragged away by police. Unless, that is, Blair's government has no objection to our shouting abuse at passing democrats, who are probably used to that sort of thing, but draws the line at anything that might offend the sensitive visitor from less tolerant climes.  There's only one way to find out. Come back, Jiang, and next time, bring your mates.<BR><BR><B>Where are the women?</B><BR><BR>Was Patricia Hewitt well advised to make gleeful capital out of Michael Howard's almost all-male shadow cabinet? True, Howard's one-to-12 ratio is almost comically shameful (though he was apparently spurned by Ann Widdecombe). But is Blair's record with women so much better? After the departure, hurt, of Mowlam, Short and Morris, Blair's six senior women (out of a cabinet of 21) are: an extremely disturbed person called Margaret Hodge, who seems in need of a long rest; Tessa Jowell, who is probably busy with the Olympics; the tireless caravanner Margaret Beckett; the not-readily-identifiable Hilary Armstrong; Baroness Valerie Amos (appointed, doesn't count); and Patricia Hewitt herself, who is still having a little difficulty reconciling her 1970s feminism with the present day. The Labour ministers with big jobs, are, like Howard's favourites, all men. Until Labour gets closer to electing a woman leader, any triumphalism in this department looks distinctly premature.