Half-full or half-empty? The government's green paper on working parents was greeted with some confusion by campaigners. It is one of the most flexible green papers ever written - full of possibility, but no certainty. Everything, says the Department of Trade and Industry, is out for consultation, so this rubber document can be bounced either way. Who shouts loudest wins - parents or the CBI?  Next Thursday outside the DTI there will be a "baby blockade" with small children and big plastic toys and tractors to mimic the fuel protesters under the banner "Does the government only listen to those with trucks?" The demo is demanding better maternity pay, paid parental leave and the right to work flexible or part-time hours.  Yesterday's green paper launch was a skilled operation. Briefers were out in force, telling one story to employers and another to the parental-rights campaigners. Stephen Byers started out dismally at the DTI: remember his "wealth creation matters more than wealth redistribution" and his attempt to sabotage part-time workers rights. He has come a long way since then but he is still trying to appease both sides.  Last April he was briefing that there would definitely be a right to paid parental leave, (13 weeks spread over five years). Since then the CBI's Digby Jones has bullied and browbeaten with such success that no paid parental leave appears in this green paper. "We were strongly against it," says the CBI.  On the other hand the women in government fought hard too - and there are options in this green paper that could profoundly improve life for parents. Before the manifesto is written, Byers will have to declare which side he is on. Women MPs and ministers were busy sending out the message yesterday - "Push him hard!" Since the CBI is now the government's political enemy anyway, (having played strong cards with considerable stupidity), Byers might as well find favour with the women instead.  One campaigning backbencher emerged from a DTI briefing saying "Brilliant!" Others were more circumspect. Britain's maternity and paternity rights are the worst in the EU and Byers agrees: "The status quo is not an option." Mothers trying to return to work after having a baby have been treated cruelly until now - no childcare and low maternity pay for only 18 weeks. The wonder is that so many do manage to get back to work.  Research by Harriet Harman for the clothing union KFAT, found women working in factories forced to return to work within weeks, describing an almost unbearable wrench. Nationally 25% of mothers go back to work well before their 18 weeks is over because they can't afford not to. Under the family-friendly Tories, maternity pay fell from 40% of average earnings to 20%, forcing poorer mothers back to work ever sooner. Now Labour will probably promise that the £62 a week maternity pay will rise to £100 and possibly more, for the full 26 weeks. Mothers who can afford it can take a full year off, while fathers get two weeks paid paternity leave - a good gesture, long overdue.  But one remarkable proposal could profoundly change the working habits of the entire nation. All mothers and fathers could get the right to reduced working hours for as long as they wish. It would be the first genuine attempt to reform Britain's long-hours culture. After the shameful way the government weaselled out of the EU directive imposing a 48-hour maximum week, here is a chance to turn Labour's "family-friendly" talk into action.  But it may not happen. The CBI yesterday expressed shock at finding the right to part-time working proposed at all. "It would be most damaging. It is a sticking point for us," they said, indignant that for once they were not forewarned. They will fight it all the way, demanding "reasoned encouragement" to employers instead of a legal obligation.  However DTI research found flexible hours was what parents wanted most. This could start a revolution. If campaigners push to see that paid parental leave is reinstated too, with a right to spread it out across one day a week, suddenly the four-day week looks possible - and eventually universal. Why not? With 30% more wealth in the next decade why not work less?  Will Byers stand firm? He has also proposed a loophole that would effectively nullify the right to flexible work. Small businesses may be exempt. That means exempting a third of the workforce, including those who most need the right: many bigger employers already offer flexibility. Labour has gone to extraordinary lengths to mollify small employers as if they were a national treasure, when the opposite is often the case. Small businesses are already exempt from many workers rights.  When the minimum wage was first mooted, it was small employers who claimed thousands of jobs would be lost. Meanwhile large employers briefed - sotto voce - that if some small businesses went to the wall because they couldn't afford to pay a living wage, it would be no bad thing. Those running small nursing homes, or marginal catering and cleaning outfits often offer bad services, undercutting better professional companies that give employees decent conditions.  Some economists suggest Britain's low productivity, about which Gordon Brown fulminates frequently, may be partly connected with the UK having too many small companies: a quarter of all EU firms employing under 20 people are in the UK. As larger companies point out sardonically, few small companies choose to be small. Yet there is a strange Treasury sentimentality about them, offering special tax breaks and assistance. Why should they get a dispensation to mistreat their workforce with exemptions from reasonable employment laws? (Should small chimney-sweeping companies still be allowed to send boys up chimneys?)  Labour's manifesto could trounce the Tories by offering a revolution for young families. It would expose Tory "family" talk for the cant it is. One popular move would be Harman's idea of a special tax credit for under-threes, allowing mothers to stay at home or use it for childcare if they go back to work. What about a pledge for state-of-the-art nurseries in every neighbourhood for all?  Could the Tories refuse to endorse these? Yet every time they match Labour spending, as on health and education, their tax cuts become more incredible. The Tories will mistakenly take the employer's side on these parental rights, while Labour now has the chance to write a dazzlingly popular manifesto for families.  • Parents at Work demo, at the DTI, 1 Victoria St, SW1. December 14, 10.30 am. Bring small children and big toys.