Rhetorical trumpets sounded and drums beat inside Downing Street yesterday as the prime minister and his generals assembled to celebrate an important victory. The flagship manifesto promise - 250,000 long-term unemployed young people into jobs - has been more than met, under budget and ahead of time. "Rejoice!" David Blunkett said, denouncing the "nothing works" cynics.  In truth, it wasn't much of a news story. It has been obvious for well over a year that the new deal was working very well, a modest but solid success. Independent audits from the National Institute of Economic and Social Research showed that 164,000 young people who had been unemployed more than six months had all found jobs at least six months sooner than they would have done without help: the rest might have gone straight into jobs anyway. It cost an average £4,000 per job and at that price the scheme just about pays for itself in saved benefits.  At the height of the 1980s slump, half a million young people had no prospect of work - a lost generation, many of whom never recovered. Now there are only 37,000 long-term young unemployed left and the number is falling fast. Yesterday wasn't news - but imagine if the new deal had failed or if it had cost a great deal more per job. The dome would have paled into insignificance as an emblem of New Labour disaster. That's the trouble for governments - targets achieved, goals met, promises kept are dull. So yesterday ITN didn't mention the new deal result at all; the BBC gave it 10 seconds. Only failures are fun.  In human terms, the new deal has lifted up thousands of young people: to be out of work with nothing to do for six months is a long time for a drifting 18-year-old. The magic ingredient is the personal adviser, a job now hotly competed for, with its satisfying results. The weary, depleted, old Employment Service has sprung into new life. Ninety per cent of new deal clients talk in glowing terms about their personal advisers, who see them right through even when they are in work. Some telephone their advisers at night for help.  Most have never had an adult personally assigned to them before. One adviser swapped clothes with his client so he could send him off to an interview respectably dressed. He wore the boy's jeans and Man U T-shirt for the day; the boy got the job. If doubters want a taste of some real good this government has done, a session sitting in on new deal interviews is heart-warming stuff.  But then come the stark reality checks: a dead boy in north Peckham is a shocking reminder of the wastelands still to be rescued, how many people, how difficult it is to change places left to fester for the past 20 years. Government spending so far has only nibbled round the edges; there is more to come, but little yet.  The full force of what it really means to inherit a society where one in every three children is born poor is starting to sink in with Labour. Even the big increases in benefits for children don't fix all this quickly. Even if schools get better, many of these children will still end up at 18 with the new deal as their last resort. As years go by, these will increasingly be the hardest cases, for whom all else has failed. The later they are found, the larger the sums that need to be spent on treatment, counselling, intensive education, whatever it takes to get them on to their feet and into society.  The new deal was allocated £2.6bn over four years. It has spent only £1bn, so there is money that should now be spent on high-intensity programmes for the toughest cases, old and young. It is cheaper than waiting for them to end up in prisons or mental hospitals. A target of getting 70% of single parents into work will be hard to hit while there are still very few affordable nurseries. Above all, to reach full employment the chancellor has to abandon one great ideological barricade and spend money where he swore he never would - on job creation in the most blighted areas where no amount of training magics up non-existent work.   Nonetheless, hitting that new deal target is an important emblem of Labour success - and the starting pistol for the election campaign. It is also a stake through the heart of the Tory party. Yesterday they struggled to find anything coherent to say about it and their response is a revealing dry run for the plight they will find themselves in next May. Wherever they turn, they skewer themselves.  Yesterday they tossed out a fog of mendacious figures, all desperate stuff. They claimed the new deal cost £5.2bn instead of £1bn. They claimed Labour inherited only half the target number when it came to power - conveniently leaving out the 14,000 more coming on to the books every month. "The new deal is a spin operation. It claims credit for finding people jobs they would have found anyway." Why? Because the economy is so strong, but how can the Tories admit that?  They promise to scrap the programme, privatising it with bonuses for every job new contractors find. It will cost, they claim, £1,000 less per job. Where will that cut fall? On education and training - the high-value part of the new deal. Never mind that many of these young people are illiterate and innumerate, private employment agencies will bundle them into jobs anyway. "Employers don't want all this waste on training," said the Tory spokesperson. Nor workers who can read and write? No.  Michael Portillo is said to be tired of the game; he wants out. Maybe he's a sleeping crocodile but it wouldn't be surprising if he really has had enough. Who could blame him for not facing another arid four years of opposition? Trying to oppose the new deal epitomises their problem. It is virtually impossible to oppose most of Labour's major programmes for schools, the NHS or the poor except with lies and the odd ideological privatisation devised for the sake of it. Rarely can politics have seemed more pointless than inside the Tory party now. The sterile search for anything different to say must be deathly toil. Never mind what works, all that matters is contriving something plausible to say. Forget honesty, oppose everything. If Portillo wants to get a life instead, why not?  This is an easy government to criticise from the left - two no-spending years, no income-tax rises, too anxious to please middle England, too frit to lead, kissing the boots of the Tory press that kick it daily. But how do you attack from the right? Seeking clear blue water, Hague has landed the Tories on a desert island alone with their own ageing clan, tax-cutting, social-programme-slashing, 1950s-moralising, Europhobic, mad little Englanders. The harder Hague tries, the worse things get.  The only time Tories might indulge in delusions of victory is when they look across the floor of the House and see a government bench still so easily, needlessly frightened. There is only one interesting question about the next election - will the quiet success of most of what Labour has done so far nerve them to be braver? Is there a bolder plan to come?  