The Children's Society launches a timely blast at the disgraceful treatment of child offenders. Those who visit and inspect young offenders institutions are rendered almost speechless by much of what they see. After the horrors of Feltham, two more - Stoke Heath and Brinsford - will come under savage attack by the chief inspector of prisons shortly. Scores of violent, deeply damaged, angry and hopeless boys fight and bully each other, driving the vulnerable sometimes to suicide, with 994 incidents of self-harm reported last year alone - eating glass, cutting their wrists, banging their heads against walls. It is almost unthinkable that Britain has returned to a regime far worse than the borstals that were closed down 30 years ago.  Britain locks up more teenagers than any other European country. The age of criminal responsibility has been reduced to 10: even Turkey, the next lowest, fixes it at 12. The number of young people in prison custody rose by 11% this year - another 3,000 when crime has been falling for six years.  Most unjust of all are the 653 children and young people remanded in custody before their trials. "You cannot imagine the state they are in," says one inspector. He takes a case he observed: a 15-year-old arrested on a Friday was thrown into police cells for the weekend - no proper meals, no clothes, no contact, completely neglected. The boy was homeless, an escapee from care. On Monday he was handed over to a private escort company which took nine hours to take him to prison. (Most are far from home towns.) It was evening and he was thrown straight into a cell and left. "He was a zombie by then." From the next morning he was bullied and within two days he had his jaw smashed by an out-of-control 17-year-old.  The system cannot cope and many are locked in for 23 hours a day, just to keep order. On remand, most get nothing in the way of treatment, education or care. The average time between arrest and sentencing is 90 days. The gross abuse by the state of these children on remand is the worst scandal. The condition of many of those already sentenced is often scarcely better.  The Home Office response to the Children's Society and to Sir David Ramsbotham, chief inspector of prisons, is utterly inadequate. You have to understand, they say, these children are not little angels. Many are hardened criminals from criminal families who will never escape a life of crime. Many are one-boy crime waves, since 25% of youth crime is committed by just 3% of these teenagers. Norman Warner, chair of the youth justice board, put out a press release accusing the Children's Society of being "unrealistic in suggesting that no young persons under 18 should ever be imprisoned".  But no one is suggesting some of them shouldn't be locked up. The issue is how many, where, and under what regime - in secure units run by local authorities with a duty of care, or by hard-pressed, under-resourced prisons that turn the already disturbed madder and badder. The refusal of the courts to send the Bulger killers from a secure unit into a prison highlighted the sharp difference in regime - one is curative, at least in intent if not always in practice, while the other is containment in violent sin bins.  Behind all this is the government's usual peculiar ambivalence about doing good. In public it talks up prison and punishment, but in private it tries to do the right thing. The result is always the worst of all worlds. Gordon Brown does it too: he makes impassioned speeches about his progressive benefit increases to groups concerned with poverty, but talks prudence and business-friendly policy to the world at large. This double message ends up as no message about how remarkably well the poorest have fared.   S o too, Jack Straw talks tough about juvenile offenders - boasting that ratboys who used to be cautioned and let go are now being seized and dealt with at once. He makes even the good he does sound tough for fear of sounding soft.  The cheap populism of his language has two bad effects. First, the magistrates and judges are always hyper- sensitive to every home secretary's message. Prison populations soared as soon as Michael Howard began his "prison works" ranting. Since Jack Straw's regime began, 9% fewer crimes have been prosecuted, yet prison numbers have swelled because magistrates dished out more and longer sentences in response to the message from his lips. So as prisons fill, the regimes struggle harder to provide anything that might prevent criminals reoffending when they get out.  The second effect is that few who might be interested get to hear about the good the government is doing within the rest of the juvenile crime system. They hear Jack Straw's words and assume his entire programme is a Howard replica. But on the ground, good things are happening that should mean, eventually, that many fewer young people will end up behind bars.  Norman Warner's youth justice board oversees a whole new system that for the first time brings constructive sense to the way the young are treated. From last April, 155 youth offending teams in every area have pooled local budgets and staff so that teachers, doctors, police, probation and social workers concerned with one child or one family draw up a plan together to coordinate education, training, anger-management, cognitive behaviour or drug treat ment courses right from the first offence. For those given a new half- custody, half-community sentence, the same team runs the whole plan seamlessly, inside and out.  Jack Straw sounded punitive at the Labour conference, but he announced one of the most hopeful programmes for keeping the young out of prison. Starting next April, 2,500 of the worst juveniles (four or more offences) will get intensive surveillance and supervision programmes instead of custody. On electronic tags or reporting in from voice-recognition telephones, they will be forced to attend courses for at least 25 hours a week, curfewing often chaotic lives, teaching a better life in the community instead of how to be worse in prison. Currently 90% of young prisoners reoffend on release. If all this works, there is a reasonable chance many fewer will be locked up and fewer will reoffend.  But Labour and Jack Straw will get no credit for any of this while so many of the young are locked away in shameful conditions. Prison for juveniles costs £800 a week - barely enough for containment and far too little for the treatment they need. Better (though variable) local authority secure units cost £3,500. This comes down to money and high-quality staff and both must be found at once. The conditions some of these children are kept in breach the UN convention on the rights of the child, and the Children Act. If they were animals, the RSPCA would sue. It's no use the Home Office telling us how horrible these young criminals are. All that matters is making them better, not worse.  