Money rains down on child poverty programmes so thick and fast it goes barely remarked these days. A total of £450m will be dispersed to children's charities, spelled out by the chancellor and David Blunkett at a conference this week. Another day, another scheme - the Tories pour scorn, preparing to axe social programmes they hope no one will notice or understand, to meet their tax-cutting promises at the next election.  This £450m is a hefty sum. It is for preventative projects for 5-13 year-olds, those left out by Sure Start for babies and Connexions for 13-18 year-olds. The list of charity projects includes the National Pyramid Trust, which runs 90 therapeutic Pyramid clubs for emotionally and socially deprived primary children to encourage them in school and avert disaster later. Baby Think Twice in Stevenage sends teenage mothers into schools to warn about what life with an unplanned baby is like. There are homework clubs and schemes for excluded children. Big Brothers and Sisters in Bristol sends young volunteers back into schools to mentor a pupil through exams. The money is for hundreds of good ideas that sprung up from local need, not devised in Whitehall.  This is cement filling in the cracks in the great wall of programmes that promise to abolish child poverty in 20 years and halve it in 10. How is the grand plan going? Labour inherited 4m poor children, measured by the EU standard of families living below half average earning. The shocking legacy of the Tory years was one in three children born poor: a third of all the poor children in Europe are born British.  So far, Labour has lifted a quarter of them out of poverty, partly through sharply rising employment, mainly through a phenomenal rise in benefits. It is curious how little these increases have entered into the national consciousness. With so much talk about "a hand-up, not a hand-out" and "work is the best welfare", there has been an assumption that all the money has gone to the "deserving" working poor on the working families tax credit and nothing much to the scroungers and shirkers on benefits. The fact is that children of unemployed families have kept pace: their income support has risen by 72% since 1997. Yet this is still, somehow, not the New Labour image, not their big story. They don't tell it often enough themselves, ambivalent, as ever, about who they are telling about what.  Gordon Brown made an emotional speech, peppered with talk of a "crusade against child poverty" and a "war" to end its "scourge and tragedy". Tucked away in this he said: "I am delighted that a broad-based coalition - an alliance for children - is coming together to fight child poverty." This is something he has devised and brought together himself, a much-needed single umbrella for the (too) many competing children's charities which often duplicate what they do, and waste money on competitively lurid fundraising.  But behind his plan is something much stranger. He wants the children's alliance to go out and with one voice raise public indignation at child poverty. He said himself it must "press government to accelerate the process of ending child poverty". He wants it to act like Jubilee 2000 which twisted his arm to take a lead in abolishing third world debt. In other words, he has himself created a pressure group designed to whip him from pillar to post until he does what he wants to do anyway.  Bizarre, says the Child Poverty Action group, who are also a part of the children's alliance. "Does he really know what he wants?" asks its director, Martin Barnes. When his group put out a press release mildly grateful for the chancellor's pre-budget largesse, but inevitably asking for more, a Treasury aide told him sourly it was "unhelpful". Yet the chancellor wants sharper critics? The alliance is as yet hesitant and unfledged, undecided whether it can unite or dare make political demands for poor children. It is sounding distinctly spineless.   The chancellor needs them because the abolition of child poverty will not happen unless the people will it. It has to shoot up the political agenda. The recent clamour on fuel bills and basic pensions show how money flows inevitably to where the noise is loudest. Who shouts loud enough for children? If child poverty was such a burning issue, would the Tories have been elected four times in a row with never a backward glance at how the ranks of the poor swelled?  Each tranche of poor children will be harder to reach. The next large group will be the children of single parents. When the new deal for lone parents rolls out next year, its high target is to get 70% into work, meeting the average for all mothers. (Only 49% of single mothers currently have jobs). That would take another 600,000 children out of poverty, almost hitting the 10-year target. What of the rest? Secretly it is whispered that in a full-employment world, when the great pool of people living a lifetime on benefits is gone, then greater generosity to those passing through relatively briefly is no political problem. More jobs and higher benefits mean no more poor children.  But the 20-year Jerusalem is far off. By then, the idea is, the generation of babies born under Labour will be rescued by each special programme, pass through better schools and end up ready for a life of success and better jobs. But to get there, they will need to grow up without a poverty that would cripple their chances.  Slice it whichever way, all this costs money that must be spent unfailingly in good times and in dips. When the clamour is all for new trains, or state-of-the-art cancer scanners or letting richer old people have free residential care, there has to be a persistent, strident voice saying, "No, poor children must come first". The truth is, they are not a popular cause. Children's charities have trouble showing them. If they look scruffy, the public is just reminded they have bad parents. Neat kids don't look poor.  This new alliance is needed and it has to be tough, political, savvy and negative. Negative about less worthy demands on the public purse, for example. Where were the lobbies confronting the lorries with placards reading "Children before diesel"? And negative about the government when it muffles its message on poverty - unsure whether it dares declare how much money is being spent, let alone how much more needed.  Gordon Brown has been looking across the Atlantic with a shudder. What if his booming prudence is discounted the way US voters dismissed the Democrat economy as if it were the weather? Many chose the glitter of trillions of tax cuts instead. Even if the children's alliance becomes a strong, vociferous lobby, in the end it is politicians who have to get out there and persuade the people: in the next election the abolition of poverty will slug it out against the abolition of poverty programmes.  