The prime minister was categoric. The French must take the responsibility for the war in Iraq. President Chirac "sabotaged" the last hope of a peaceful solution. "If the UN had given a strong and united ultimatum to Saddam, it is possible that we could have avoided conflict." Tony Blair did not explain how French support for a second security council resolution would have kept the peace. But there is only one possible scenario on which his allegations could be based. It begins with the United Nations agreeing to threaten imminent war against Iraq. That is a ludicrous proposition. Apart from America and Britain, every member of the security council was opposed to an invasion, despite the campaign of bullying and bribery. Russia, like France, had announced its intention to veto a second, bellicose, resolution. The unlikely hypothesis then continues with Saddam Hussein responding to that threat by destroying the weapons of mass destruction that the coalition has, as yet, been unable to find. In the final assumption (which stretches credibility to breaking point) the American forces in Bahrain and the Gulf pack and go home.  The prime minister's latest exegesis has again changed the explanation of why the war was fought. For the three weeks that preceded his allegations against the French, the coalition had been liberating the people of Iraq. We can only presume that if a UN threat and consequent Baghdad climbdown had made the invasion unnecessary, the Anglo-American axis would have left the Iraqi tyranny intact. But it is not inconsistency that worries me about Blair's insistence that France must take the blame. I keep recalling what Aneurin Bevan said about Anthony Eden's explanation of Suez. "If he believes that, he is too stupid to be prime minister."  Bevan offered an alternative explanation for Eden's attempt to shift the blame. I have put it out of my mind because, having spent so many years insisting that the prime minister is an honest politician, I need more time to prepare my recantation. However, I have never suggested that Blair is too easily moved to gratitude. So I write without compunction that instead of excoriating the French, the prime minister ought to have given thanks for Chirac. A month ago, the president of France saved his bacon.  The invasion of Iraq was always going to be endorsed by the Commons. The Conservatives guaranteed that. But Blair might have been in a minority within his party. The country was against the war. Donald Rumsfeld announced his willingness for America to go it alone. The prime minister recognised that he was in trouble. Last week he accepted that he might have been forced to resign. Then France announced that it would not support the war "under any circumstances". A majority of the security council said more or less the same. But, in a brilliant public relations coup, France was represented as "vetoing" United Nations' action. Chirac's refusal to legitimise the American invasion became an act of sabotage against the world order that Blair was battling to preserve.  The nonsense was believed in Britain because of our attitude towards the French. We know ourselves to be superior to the frogs. But in their perversity, the frogs insist on believing that they are superior to us. They make not the slightest attempt to hide their feelings. I experienced their presumption last week in Paris when I asked a waiter to describe a fish - included on the menu in both English and French, but unknown to me. He obliged with exquisite courtesy, but left me feeling that a person of such ignorance should not be in his restaurant. The temptation to mention Waterloo was almost irresistible.  Waterloo says it all. Napoleon was the most unsuccessful general in history. Yet, from the Arc de Triomphe to Les Invalides, he is treated like the great victor. The French even have a word for their conspicuous self-confidence. It is "élan". People who enjoy a similar level of self-confidence find it highly attractive. But in the less self-assured, it encouraged the worst sort of chauvinism.  Shakespeare knew exactly how to exploit English unease about France. The Dauphin - not having read Henry IV Part 2 - sent Henry V tennis balls to remind him of his youth and inexperience. But England's authentic warrior king had put aside his callow follies. He first smote the French in battle (although outnumbered) and then charmed Princess Katherine off her tiny Gallic feet. That is the relationship with France that most Englishmen regard as the proper order. Yet the French persist in behaving as if they are our equals. Tony Blair chose to pander to that prejudice. Let us hope that when he begins to rebuild his relationship with his European allies, Chirac behaves with élan and forgives the youthful indiscretion.  