One of the many advantages of no longer being an active politician, is the right that status provides not to have a firm opinion on great issues. Had I still been the Member of Parliament for Sparkbrook, half a dozen Serbs would have come into my constituency advice bureau last Saturday and demanded to know whether I was for or against the bombing of their homeland. When I replied that Slobodan Milosevic was an evil man, against whom the people of Kosovo must be defended, they would have asked me if I thought that cruise missiles could produce that result. Then I would have looked shifty and mumbled.  Notwithstanding those unspoken doubts I am still, on balance, on the side of the President - Clinton that is, not Milosevic. For I have joined the ranks of 'the something must be done brigade', without - as is usual with such people - knowing what that something is. I am, however, certain about my unease. I can even describe what brought it on. Once again my instinctive certainty was undermined by that dangerous thing, a little learning. I have just read All Too Human, George Stephanopoulos's account of his 'political education' as press secretary to William Jefferson Clinton.  Stephanopoulos recounts a conversation with Dick Morris - the long-time Clinton crony who was brought into the White House to assist in the President's re-election. Morris wanted to bomb Serbia when Bosnia was being subjected to Milosevic's 'ethnic cleansing' and he set out his reasons with admirable honesty. 'They're slaughtering the Bosnians, but so what?... I want to bomb the shit out of the Serbians to look strong.' If Stephanopoulos is believed, the moral damage done by Morris polluted all the President's policy. Morris formulated 'the 60 per cent rule'. Whatever policy was favoured by six out of ten Americans had to be supported by the President. 'Dick explained his theory in elaborate terms. But it boiled down to a relatively simple proposition. Steal the popular sounding parts of the Republican platform, sign them into law and you'll win'. To my regret, Stephanopoulous did not ask him why winning was worth the effort and expense, if all that victory offered was the chance to implement policies which would still be pursued even if you lost.  So President Clinton signed into law a Medicare Bill which reduced the service he had promised to increase. And he won. It was a victory for 'slick' politics - the adjective with which history will define the Clinton presidency. But his conduct raised a question which politicians in an increasingly sophisticated world must ask themselves. How long is it before the people who elect them begin to understand how slick they are, and even when they take honest decisions, suspect that there is a Dick Morris telling them to forget about the merits and remember the opinion polls? The problem with snake oil salesmen is that they find it very difficult to market an honest product.  A case in point is last week's announcement of extra funds for city comprehensive schools. Some of the educationists whose views I most respect believe that the money will be well spent. Children will be 'selected' for special tuition. But David Blunkett now says that the 'read my lips' promise was a joke and - if the government persists in cutting income tax rather than properly increasing the whole education budget - the entire secondary system may benefit from the investment in extra teachers.  Once again, I am a 'don't know' or at least an 'aren't sure'. But on the day before the House of Commons announcement, I was a firm 'anti'. The snake oil salesman - in anticipation of the statement to Parliament - had chosen to promote the initiative as a concession to the suburban middle classes - a way of guaranteeing that the comprehensive system met their special needs at the expense of the generality of children.  I have tried to think of that prejudiced briefing as a great, if dishonest blow for the principles which I endorse - an attempt to mobilise the essential 60 per cent in support of an initiative on behalf of a disadvantaged minority. I would not mind a little fraud if for a good cause. But I do not believe that government can (as distinct from should) be run in such a way. Ministers who are so in thrall to the magic 60 per cent that they have to pretend to be always on their side, will not have the courage to stand up for the minorities when there is a clear conflict between their needs and the demands of the big battalions.  The Dick Morris formula tells us all we need to know about the 'new politics' and William Clinton its most talented practitioner. And it makes Lyndon Johnson, an old-time fixer, seem saintly. Had he adopted the 60 per cent rule, he would not have signed the Civil Rights Bill into law. Another Democratic President, Franklin D Roosevelt, believed in assembling majorities behind his policies. But he decided the policies first and assembled the majorities by persuasion afterwards. The 60 per cent rule stands that principle on its head. I may be unsure about bombing the Serbs - even though it is supported by 60 per cent of the British people. But I have no doubts about the undesirability of governing by opinion polls.