However small the turnout and no matter how bizarre the result, Thursday June 10th 1999 is destined to become a crucial date in the history of British politics. The result of the European parliamentary elections will prove little about the popularity of the major parties and demonstrate less about support for a single currency. But Thursday will mark a turning point in the argument about creating a genuine democracy - the moment at which the idea of introducing proportional representation was abandoned for at least a generation. There are sound constitutional arguments against introducing what supporters of the change impertinently, and inaccurately, call "fair voting". The theory that democracy depends on parliament becoming a mathematical reflection of the percentage of votes cast for the rival parties is a simplistic absurdity. And the notion that the smallest party, in a three party system, should decide which of its more popular competitors forms the government is equally indefensible. But for years it seemed that proportional representation was an essential ingredient of radical chic and would, in consequence, be imposed on this country as a political fashion accessory. Not now.  The first major blow against the so called "voting reforms" was struck by Roy Jenkins himself - the man chosen by the prime minister to lead us into a land flowing with single transferable votes. The scheme he recommended was so complicated that half the cabinet, forced to vote in such an election, would have unintentionally spoilt their ballot papers. Then there was the near scandal of the closed list - the system chosen for Thursday's European poll because, although it required votes to be cast for a party rather than for an individual, its proponents insisted that it was the only feasible alternative to simply electing the candidate with the most votes.  And still the blows rained down. Labour, although exceeding most expectations in the Scottish Parliamentary Elections, was unable to take office until the Liberal party gave its official support. In the end Jim Wallace capitulated and joined the administration without gaining any significant concessions from Donald Dewar. So, although a majority of the members of the Scottish parliament were elected on the promise to abolish student tuition fees, the idea was lost in the horse trading - not, in itself a strong argument for coalition politics. But the whole process struck fear into Westminster hearts. What would happen if, in a general election decided by proportional representation, the Liberal party were to be led by a man who put principle ahead of power?  The year of damage - despite the demonstrations of constitutional impropriety and the proof of impracticability - might not have been enough to destroy the idea completely. The flimsy edifice tottered but needed a final push to make it collapse. That knockout punch will land on Thursday when Labour loses almost half the seats it won in 1992, without anything like a comparable slump in its share of the poll. Suddenly Gerald Kaufman's suggestion will seem hideously relevant. He proposed that supporters of proportional representation in the parliamentary Labour party should come together to identify the hundred volunteers who would sacrifice their seats in order to achieve "fair voting".   The high minded will be disappointed, and the cynics not surprised, that it was political self interest which made the difference. But constitutional changes have always been built on the calculation of party interest. That is why Labour supported PR when it was the third party and why the Liberals support it now. Politicians have a moral obligation to put their principles into practice. Throwing away the chance is a dereliction of duty. Tony Blair knows that. The absurd system for the European elections was tolerable because he did not care about the outcome. But he cares about the outcome of general elections more than any party leader I have ever known.  In any case, the real objective of "voting reform" is being achieved without the convenience of an electoral upheaval. Proportional representation guarantees coalition and coalition ensures that a party of the centre is permanently in government. We have got that already and all the young Blairites who were once so keen on "fair voting" are not going to sacrifice their seats for the sake of political consistency. Next Thursday will demonstrate which way the wind blows. On Friday we will be deafened by the noise of sails being trimmed.