Thirty years ago, an elderly MP called Charlie Pannell stalked the corridors of Westminster like a predator looking for easy prey. Whenever I saw him approaching, I hid behind statues of Mr Gladstone. For it was his habit to grasp young backbenchers by the elbow and subject them to homilies from which, thanks to the vice-like grip of a time-served engineer, they were unable to escape. On the day of the Great Common Market debate, like me, he defied the party whip and voted for British membership. As we left the lobby, he thought it necessary to tell me: "He that would gain his life must first risk losing it." At the time, all that came into my head was a story which (probably incorrectly) was attributed to Cardinal Cushing. A priest, who had been called to give extreme unction to the victim of a road accident, asked him: "Do you believe in the Father, Son and Holy Ghost?" And the dying man replied: "This is not the time for riddles!" But today I feel some sympathy for Charlie Pannell's platitudes. Indeed in the unlikely event of my meeting the prime minister, I would (in the even more unlikely event of his asking my advice) repeat the biblical misquotation. The time has come for Tony Blair to improve his popularity by accepting the biggest risk of his premiership.  When discussing Tony Blair's prospects, it is always important to make clear that nobody really believes that we run the risk of a Tory government. William Hague will save us from that. What the prime minister has to decide is whether he wants to win a grudging second term, or hopes for glad confident morning again.  I constantly write and say that, far from calculating every policy according to its electoral popularity, Tony Blair really believes in what is called "the project". Unfortunately, many of those around him give quite the opposite impression. To become a national hero again he has to perform an act of reckless daring. He needs to say - or better still, have said about him - that he nailed his flag to an unpopular mast and fought for the ground over which it flew simply because he felt that was the right place to be.  For both better and worse, there is only one candidate for elevation into a test of faith and morals. It is British membership of the single European currency. It would be better if he could demonstrate his courage with an initiative which would unite the Labour party behind him. But even in my most optimistic mood, I cannot imagine him suddenly arguing for an extra penny on the standard rate of income tax in order to index link the pension. Nor would he seem credible if he did. Any socialist policy which he accepted would be a betrayal of his own beliefs. Supporting the euro would certainly offend some of his potential supporters. That would prove his integrity. There are worse initiatives with which to demonstrate that desired result for the simple reason that immediate membership is an economic necessity and eventual membership absolutely inevitable.  Siren voices - if such a female metaphor is appropriate to Philip Gould and Alastair Campbell - will tell the PM that a rush of principle to the head may make him a hero again with voters who admire thoughtless honesty, but will do nothing to make him popular with the Murdoch papers. They will be repeating the error of judgment which has already done immense damage to the government's reputation. Labour did not win because it was supported by the Sun. The Sun supported Labour because Mr Murdoch knew the party was going to win. The more people who say of Tony Blair, as they once said of Margaret Thatcher, "Agree with the prime minister or not, you have to admire his courage and determination," the more Mr Murdoch's papers are likely to say the same.  The prime minister's whole political philosophy inhibits him from taking a strong line on the euro. He despises and distrusts ideology. So he is neither passionate for the high ideal of European integration nor devoted to the sentimental notion of preserving national sovereignty. He wants to do what, in his judgment, is best for the country at any one time. It is perfectly reasonable to argue that, by the sort of calculation which would be made by the chairman of Great Britain plc, this is not the moment for membership. But he is not running Great Britain plc. When a politician talks about waiting for the terms and time to be right, it sounds like vacillation.  There is, of course, one other obstacle which bars the prime minister's way to the high ground. It is called Gordon Brown. But, despite my increasing sympathy with Mr Brown's policies, I have to admit that, for the prime minister to become a hero again, there has to be a second act of reckless daring. The chancellor has to be put in his place.  