We can take it for granted that Fraser Kemp - one of the most sensible politicians I know - had no real objection to William Hague appearing as guest goodie-goodie on Songs of Praise. The formal complaint, which the shrewd Mr Kemp has announced he is to make to the BBC, is intended to remind us of what an ass the leader of the opposition made of himself. Thanks to the Sunday Telegraph, that cunning object has been brilliantly achieved. And, although he will not learn the essential lesson, Mr Hague will have been provided with further proof that politicians who jump on every passing bandwagon end up with bruised backsides. Apparently Mr Hague's decision to Sing-Along-With-Greg-Dyke was taken out of desperation. He no longer accepts invitations from Newsnight because there is, according to an aide, no advantage to to be gained by "going on a show where you are treated like a criminal". The Today programme has been "boycotted" ever since the opposition leader was subjected to 32 interruptions during one interview.  Mr Hague is not the first condemned man to turn to God in his hour of need. But when other helpers fade and comforts flee, the usual procedure is to announce a sudden conversion. For Mr Hague nothing would have been easier. We know that he was once a devotee of transcendental meditation. All he needed to do was tell us when he lost his faith in yogic flying. Unfortunately for his reputation, the leader of the opposition chose to insist that (although no one had previously recognised his piety) he is a man of profound Christian belief. So he chose to explain that he performed the necessary devotions with the utmost determination.  Membership of the Anglican communion normally involves attendance at Sunday service. Mr Hague realised that - although his activities do not receive the publicity he would wish - some people might have noticed that he is not regularly in his pew for matins or even the lazy man's alternative of evensong. So he explained: "The truth is that I actually go to church two or three times a week. Because of the job I do, I attend a lot of services but it means that, come Sunday, which is the only day which I can spend with Ffion, we choose not to go to church but choose to rejoice in long walks."  The news that the leadership of the Tory party requires such regular church attendance will come as a surprise to many historians. However, since Mr Hague was not hit by a thunderbolt when he made that claim, we must assume it to be true - although I hope that an investigative journalist will take the trouble to keep a detailed record of Mr Hague's religious diary. More important, some Christians will argue that the apologia, whether plausible or not, is just an admission that Sunday sacrament is not one of the leader of the opposition's priorities and that he allows it to be pushed out of his diary by judo practice with Sebastian Coe and whatever else separates him from his wife. William Hague will brush such criticism aside.  He believes that he is worshipping God in those long walks. "I come from a family" he explained, "where my mother used to say: 'God is in the garden, in everything that grows.'" I suspect that Mrs Hague senior had read Lifemanship by Stephen Potter, a humourous work much in vogue in the 1950s. It was the sequel to Gamesmanship - subtitled "How to win without exactly cheating" - and it advised how to apply a similar technique to the game of life. It made specific recommendations to readers who did not wish to rise early on Sunday mornings. Do not, it urged, admit you are lazy. Baffle your critics by explaining that the true Christian finds God in everything around him.  Although I did not know it when I read Lifemanship, Potter's theology - set out so eloquently by William Hague's mother and endorsed by her son - is called pantheism. The Dictionary of Christian Theology defines this as the "doctrine that the whole universe is divine". It goes on to say that to Christians "pantheism is entirely abhorrent, because it does away with the absolute distinction between the creature and the Creator". So William Hague made history. He is the first Conservative leader to espouse a doctrine which the Church of England finds entirely repulsive.  I do not suggest that all over England rural deans are resigning their Conservative membership, that monks are abandoning their vows of silence to excoriate William Hague or that church wardens and sidesman are demanding his trial as a heretic. But one or two people who listen to Songs of Praise will realise that he constantly commits the sin of the apostasy. He says whatever seems convenient at the time. For a politician the punishment is worse than death at the stake. It is ridicule.