Just like old times. Men called Khan, Patel and Elahi are writing to me again from Birmingham's inner city. Their letters begin, accurately I hope, with the assertion that I am a friend of Britain's Muslims. Fifteen years ago, that seductive compliment persuaded me to suggest that Salman Rushdie should - as a gesture of respect and conciliation - postpone the paperback publication of Satanic Verses. My reasonable request satisfied nobody. However, it was not that unhappy experience that prevented me from passing the new test of friendship - the public condemnation of Ann Cryer MP. Her crime is the brave suggestion that new immigrants to Britain should be required, or at least induced, to learn English before they are admitted to this country. Her offence was compounded by the way in which it stimulated Jeff Rooker and David Blunkett into sensibly arguing that the idea was worth examination. There will be some Muslims (not to mention Hindus and Sikhs) who will be hard to convince of its merits. But slogans about a multiracial society being multilingual (of which I have been guilty myself in my time) do very little to help the ethnic minorities' economic prospects.  Nobody in their right minds doubts that an inability to speak English is a huge handicap for anyone who lives in an English-speaking country. The only issue in dispute is whether it is right to force misguided men and women to act in their own best interests. John Stuart Mill offered a typically uncompromising answer to that question: "All errors which a man is likely to commit against advice are far outweighed by the evil of allowing others to constrain him for his good."  With new immigrants the issue is complicated by the understandable sensitivity of the black and Asian British. They do not receive the respect that they deserve. So they are naturally opposed to any initiative that seems to patronise them.   I was a member of a cabinet in which a group of libertarians, eloquently led by Peter Shore, objected to extensions of motorway seat-belt regulations on exactly that the John Stuart Mill principle. Some of us argued that a benevolent state has a duty to protect its citizens from their own folly. Others insisted that in a sophisticated society, John Donne's dictum about a man not being an island is stood on its head. By diminishing ourselves we diminish others. The prosaic (as distinct from the poetic) point is illustrated by road-accidents statistics. Every time a motorist is thrown through a windscreen, the whole community has to pay the hospital bill.  The same argument certainly applies to the new immigrant whose employment opportunities are limited by his or her inability to speak English. The rest of society pays the job seeker's allowance and whatever other benefits the state provides. But, if that were the only burden that the community had to bear, I would not even contemplate making entry applicants gain a working knowledge of the working language. Unfortunately, reduced job prospects are no more than the most obvious of the detriments that the language handicap will cause.  What is euphemistically called "the language problem" is one of the main reasons that so many children and grandchildren of immigrants from the Indian sub-continent crowd together in inner cities.  When I was a Birmingham MP, I lost count of the occasions on which a family, in desperate need of a decent house, turned down the chance of a suburban council tenancy because they could not face life outside the Urdu or Hindi enclave. Usually the problem was said to be the women, who could not shop in English-speaking supermarkets. Sometimes the men actually discouraged their wives from speaking English as a not very subtle way to keep them tethered to the kitchen. More often the resistance came from the women themselves, who were simultaneously too proud and too timid to take lessons.  So the burden fell on children who were required to interpret for their mothers when the doctor, the meter-reader or a travelling salesman came to the door. It obliged them to accept responsibilities that are more appropriate to adults and added to the debilitating suspicion that they were prisoners in an alien world.  Not even John Stuart Mill believed that a free society allowed one member of a family to prejudice the interests of the rest. The existence of a minority that does not speak English within our society ought to concern us all. For it damages the prospects of the whole community in which the non-English-speaking men and women live. If the home secretary's inquiries conclude that new immigrants must acquire a working knowledge of Britain's native language, I will - as a friend of the British Muslims - applaud his decisions.  