For years, enthusiastic Europhiles like me have repeated the mantra that taking Britain into the single currency was the certain way for Tony Blair to establish his place in history. Some of us actually believed it. The rest hoped that a prime minister - who would sooner or later begin to worry about posterity - could be encouraged, by the thought of his picture on a postage stamp, to do what was right for Britain.  The predictions were clearly wrong. Destiny waits for Tony Blair in Washington not Brussels. Of that I became absolutely convinced when, a couple of weeks ago, I discussed our attitude towards Iraq with a senior cabinet minister who newspapers always describe as a hawk. And he set out what he called the "nightmare scenario".  Tony Blair had not, by then, nailed his colours to the United Nations mast. But the secretary of state rightly predicted that he would do so at the Labour party conference. In the six days since that speech, history has moved on in exactly the direction that would turn the "nightmare" into a reality.  Clearly - at least in the view of my informant - there would be no diplomatic or military crisis if the UN swiftly passed the sort of resolution that allows the Anglo-American alliance to take immediate and exemplary action. The result would be a war, though - he assured me - a smaller war than most people fear. Even if the security council came to a quick decision to do nothing the Atlantic partnership would be preserved as both president and prime minister announced that they must fill the vacuum.  However there is, I was reminded, a third possibility. If the UN agonises on for weeks the US might lose its patience and actually invade Iraq (or at least drop the first bomb on Baghdad), before the deliberations were complete and concluded.  Apparently that risk is increased by the need for whatever war is waged to commence in early spring and be concluded before Gulf temperatures rise to a level that makes a land battle impossible for soldiers born, brought up and trained in more moderate climates.  I ask the obvious question. Was it conceivable that, in those circumstances, Blair - while neither condemning the American actions or actively dissociating from them - would refuse to participate in the invasion? With a sigh of gloom, which often accompanies the need to choose between equally unpalatable alternatives, I was assured that there was a very real possibility that Britain would decline to take part in an operation which, in effect, elbowed the UN aside.  And I believed it. Tony Blair had a record of sticking - sometimes perversely - to the basic principles that he suddenly conjures out of the back of his mind. And I, for one, will not complain if they include respect for the rule of international law. Honour will be reinforced by expediency. The prime minister must know that, after the speech he made last Tuesday, choosing the United States instead of the United Nations could only lead to absolute humiliation. Clearly, the allegation that he is President Bush's poodle is unfounded. A lap dog would not have raised in such strong terms the need to implement the UN resolutions on the future of Palestine. But all the sneers will be justified if he falls into line with American anxiety to get the war over without caring a damn about world opinion.  Winning United Nations approval for a war against Iraq, does not, in itself, justify the action taking place. It will soothe the consciences of ministers who want to preserve both their righteous reputation and their cabinet seats, but it cannot alter the merits of precipitate action. A resolution obtained offering greater financial help to Russia and an end to complaints about civil rights violations in both Moscow and Beijing lacks moral authority. And it is too late for the United States to say that the UN is the arbiter of international law. President Bush has already made clear that he will ignore any of its decisions that he dislikes. Whatever the limits of gaining United Nations approval, refusal to wait even to see if it is available would be an intolerable display of imperial arrogance. That would be the moment at which the prime minister would have to make his reservations public.  I accept Bill Clinton's view that up to now, he has exercised an essential restraining influence in private - said things that no one else could say. But that may turn out to have been the easy part of the operation.  A place in history is not easily obtained. It may well be that Tony Blair should qualify because of his determined efforts to apply private restraints. But, destiny may demand a more visible position. Then, there will be plenty of people who argue that the special relationship must take precedence over personal conduct. I hope the prime minister ponders what posterity will say about that.  