Foot and mouth is an ancient disease which thrives on modernity. It loves the black holes into which farm animals are crammed, and the debilitated condition in which they stagger through their miserable lives. But even more than that, it loves the long-distance economy which now governs the distribution of nearly all our food. By the time we knew there was a problem, half the lambs in Northumberland were in Devon, and half the lambs in Devon were in Northumberland, and the disease was emerging everywhere. Why should this be? Were there not enough sheep in Devon already? Do people in Northumberland refuse to eat local lamb? Do farmers take their animals on holiday? The long-distance food economy is a disaster for farmers, a disaster for the environment, a disaster for consumers and a disaster for animal welfare. But it's a bonanza for big business. Just as the big biotech firms have tried to capture food production through genetic engineering and patenting, so the big superstores and haulage companies have sought to capture food distribution, and the government, as always, has been only too willing to assist.  Small slaughterhouses have been closed down in droves not because Europe says so (in France, despite the same regulations, hundreds persist and thrive), but because the Ministry of Agriculture has been pursuing a deliberate programme to wipe them out. As the superstores buy directly from the biggest and cheapest farmers, local livestock markets close, forcing those producers who don't sell to the big chains to drive their animals to markets ever further away.  The superstores want to sell "Scotch beef", so they send cattle to pasture in Scotland for a fortnight, after which they can be legally described as such. They want Welsh lamb, so they send English and Scotch lambs to Wales before killing them. These practices, we are told, permit us all to enjoy cheap food. In truth, they merely force us to pay by other means, such as disease eradication programmes. The thousands of animals being burnt today are being sacrificed on the altar of supermarket profits. Email 