John Smith did not have the chance to be a great leader of the Labour Party. But he was the necessary, probably the inevitable, leader in his time and place. As such he was a brilliant success. Never did a more decent man rise to the top of British politics. He had a rare coherence of morality as well as mind. Although he was a skillful advocate in court, and a wonderful performer in the bear-pit, it was the advocacy of social improvement that came from the core of his being, and here his hierarchy of principles never changed. With unqualified passion, he wanted the betterment of all society, not just part of it. The Scottish belief in community, and in the duty of successful men to advance its case, came as naturally to him as it once came to a certain kind of Tory: the generous, inclusive outlook most public people used to have. It is not too soon to see John Smith as a transitional figure. When the decencies have been done, you can see it right away. He ran a half-modernised Labour Party but he was a man of the old politics, the last survivor of the Callaghan cabinet. Steeped in Labourism, burnished by the swiftness of a clever Scottish lawyer, he asked the party few awkward questions. With the Government in free-fall decline, this comforting style paid dividends. Fate compels the party to look at itself once more, and make a statement about what it is. The necessity for choice will pose essentially two alternatives: carrying forward the momentum towards true modernity, or extending the transitional phase Smith thought sufficient to take Labour into power. By demanding such a debate, John Smith's tragedy need not be the party's catastrophe. Handled sensibly, the contest could yet make Labour a party for which people will vote with enthusiasm rather than the resignation that now widely obtains. It will range the John Prescott against the Tony Blair school of politics, and those men will surely be among the main names in the field, with Gordon Brown and Robin Cook upholding the claims of the Scottish dynasty. For my part, I hope the party thinks deeply about what it means to look forward, not back, and seizes its chance to make the positive appeal John Smith had yet to articulate. The leader matters. The wrong choice could bring disaster in its train. The system, as much as the party, is owed a leader the whole nation can respect. But the state of things is on his side. The leader is dead, long live the leader. Without the 18-month tenure of a brave, accomplished man, that sentiment would have been impossible to set down, except as a sour joke.