The manufacture of consent is a familiar art of the government propagandist. It's something the media need to avoid playing their unwatchful part in, but it's part of what political persuasion is about. The invention of consent is another matter. It's the modern byproduct of a politics that turns people off. It's therefore likely to be especially alluring to a government that managed to induce only 59% of the voters to turn out at the last election. So we are discovering now. The single most contentious element of the Blair-Blunkett law reform programme is being prepared with the invention of consent. The appointed inventor is Michael Wills MP, junior minister to the lord chancellor. His Saturday letter to the Guardian, replying to a leader, let us into his workshop. Curtailing the right to trial by jury, he wrote, would be subject to the full panoply of consultation. But this was not the point. The change was already a done deal with the people. "I am surprised you ignore the manifesto on which this government was elected last June," he declared, from a substantial height. "The people considered that manifesto and voted for it." There was hardly any more to be said.  Seldom has the doctrine of the mandate been more starkly, or more absurdly, put. First, it seems to overlook the problem of scale. When governments got in with 50 or even 40% support, as they did at times in the last century, the mandate might have been   a plausible construct of what could be called the general will. The Blair government got the votes of 23% of the electorate. Was this proof of anything in detail, except a level of reluctant approval exceeding that accorded the other parties?  Second, it must be doubted how many of the few people who, as research always tells us, "considered that manifesto" read the section on trial by jury. Their omission would be forgivable. The subject was never mentioned in any speech by anyone in the Labour leadership. It had no priority. It did not feature in the party broadcasts. It could not have been in even the remoter minds of many, if any, of the 10m voters who gave Blair a second term.  That is because of a third factor, namely the absence from this famous, legitimising, solemnly examined manifesto of any explicit promise to abolish the right to jury trial. There were no speeches on the subject partly because the words of the manifesto were crafted to avoid the provocation that might require them. It promised to "remove the widely abused right of defendants alone to dictate whether or not they should be tried in a crown court": words that only aficionados of courts were meant to understand as promising the widespread curtailment of jury trial.  What we have, in short, is the opposite of the Wills version of the truth. Instead of majority consent being demonstrably given by the classic democratic method, an attenuated minority were   deprived of such opportunity as they might have had to object to a proposal whose purpose was carefully masked in gobbledegook. Far from the voters having agreed to abolish some jury trials, even the small number who read the manifesto were not confronted with the meaning of what the next Labour government intended to do.   If they had been, no doubt Labour would still have won. But this only adds to the corruption of the mandate theory as Wills and his masters are applying it to trial by jury. What they claim to have got approved, they dishonestly concealed. Now they're relying on it as protection against the thinness of their substantive arguments: their dissembling about the quality of justice that will result: their pretence that the change has nothing to do either with getting more convictions or with saving money: the abject sophistry with which Mr Wills proposes that, because 95% of all crime is tried by magistrates, jumping that up to 98% (why not 100?) should cause us not the slightest apprehension.  The plan grows out of a recommendation by Lord Justice Auld, whose inquiry into the trial process was always   likely to be hot politics in an election year. He adroitly deflected blatant attempts to nobble him, or leak a few cherry-picked ideas. Telephoned one day by a Downing Street official probing to find out where his report was heading, Auld apparently asked Mr Blair's man to put his questions on paper. The official, recoiling in horror, proposed just a casual, always deniable conversation. Fine, said the judge - but wait a moment while I get my shorthand writer.  The probe was quickly abandoned. But abolition of the right to trial by jury turned out to be one of Auld's central recommendations, and one most pleasing to ministers. The right, he proposed, should no longer be available across the range of medium-level cases carrying prison sentences of up to two years, where defendants can now choose whether to go before magistrates or a jury.  Under the rules laid out by Auld, some experts have estimated, this could halve the 50,000 jury trials that take place every year. Internal Home Office papers, picked up in a pub and never formally repudiated, show one official even estimating a two thirds reduction. So this is not a minor re-drawing of the frontiers, as Wills implies. It's an attack on the historic right - one of the most celebrated and worthwhile instruments of British democratic freedom - of perhaps half those accused of serious crimes to be tried by a jury of their peers.  Governments have dreamed of doing this for at least a   decade. The last time it was subjected to rational discussion, when Jack Straw was home secretary, the legislature threw it out. Straw brought it forward twice, in different forms, and each time the House of Lords rejected the new mode of trial he proposed. Each time, the bill fell essentially because of outrage at what could easily lapse into class-based justice.  Shoplifting might attract a small sentence, but for first-time offenders would ruin their reputation, which meant their right to a jury must be inviolate. On the other hand, if that right existed for a white professional, why should it be withdrawn from a black street robber with a record? Such were the dilemmas the Lords thought irresolvable by any bureaucratic system that transferred the decision from the defendant to the magistrates or the district judge.  The arguments have not changed. Auld has not demolished them. It's a matter, in the end, of moral choice. Wills' invention of popular consent is a way of not engaging with the assault the government wants to make on a cornerstone of liberty. It is saying to the House of Lords: do not dare, once again, to defy the will of the people. But the clearer message of this history is to Labour MPs in the House of Commons: you did not get elected to abolish the right to trial by jury, and therefore have no duty to be whipped into abandoning the belief many of you hold, that it would be indefensible.