This week, two former national leaders joined forces to do their country service. They were from different parties, but had each done time in the highest office. As such, they had a role in public and political life that transcended politics. They enjoyed, in a word, general respect. They were and are a credit to their class, the political class. When politics closes down in some societies - whether for the summer or for life - its denizens are not written out of the script. They rise to a certain kind of occasion. Neither Gerald Ford nor Jimmy Carter was among the great US presidents. Arguably they were the two least successful holders of the office since the war. But they carry the stamp. They've kept authority. So it was natural for them to head the National Commission on Federal Election, which was charged with proposing reforms in the aftermath of last November's bitter farce in Florida, hanging chads and all. Their report, with a raft of plans to re-enfranchise voters and make federal elections more meaningful, has been greeted with somewhat restrained enthusiasm by the beneficiary of that calamitous event, George Bush. But nobody has challenged their bipartisan credentials for writing it.  They've both retained post-presidential dignity. Carter in particular has become a kind of ombudsman, often self- appointed, creatively investigating many ills of the world. He seems a selfless, yet still ambitious, man of global purpose. The US is a land of intense partisanship, where the linkage between party and patronage is more richly oiled than it ever is in Britain. Party labels are for life. But great men rise above the battle. They want to. They're allowed to.  In Britain this couldn't happen, and it's hard to be certain why. Former prime ministers are invariably damaged goods. The idea of putting Margaret Thatcher and Jim Callaghan in charge of electoral reform would be unimaginable, partly because nobody would trust them to agree but also because they wouldn't accept the task. Consider the last two holders of the office, and you recall that most former prime ministers, unless like Callaghan and Harold Wilson they opt for withdrawal, focusing mainly on two things: salvaging their reputation, and making a lot of money.  Lady Thatcher is the prime example. Just about every utterance she makes is directed at self-vindication. She travels incessantly abroad, not speaking for Britain as much as promoting herself and filling her pockets. Britain is worth talking about only as an embodiment of Thatch-erite prejudices and values, not for any other quality or any other leader. The lady's vanity knows few limits. Not long ago, asked at a meeting of business people in Texas why the first George Bush hadn't gone into Baghdad to take out Saddam Hussein at the end of the 1991 Gulf war, she replied, to rapturous applause: "Because I was no longer prime minister."  That's the measure of the baroness's post-political life. Far from rising above party, she remains an ever-baleful influence upon it, to the plea sure of an ever diminishing circle of people who call themselves Conservatives. Her special gift has not been to the breadth of the nation but the narrowness of a self-created sect, with the brilliant results we now see unfolding in the leadership election.  In his own post-political world, John Major has followed her. No Ford or Carter he. For Major too, money and exoneration seem to be what count. He struggles for an eminence we decline to allow him. The pre-political years of scraping a living are being followed by years of plenty that the old Major could only dream of. He owes every penny of it to what the voters did for him. Yet there's no windfall tax on the benefits from boardroom and memoirs which, without the prime ministership, would not have been available. The tax comes in terms of reputation. These people soon lose most of their credentials to epitomise, at some special level, the national interest. They cease, unfortunately, to be a national asset.  Bill Clinton isn't like Ford or Carter either. For one thing, he's as interested in personal money as any Thatcher. He has bills to pay, and debts to meet, so he must speak and write for money. But a scene took place on Monday that proved how large a figure he still remains, and how available for national duty.  Opening his post-presidential office in Harlem, he was received like a hero. The bands played, and a crowd of 2,000 waited two hours in the sun to see him. He has started to establish an agenda above party politics. One of his biggest themes is the worldwide struggle against Aids, another is the American rural poor, another the empowerment of places like Harlem. The aura of authority and the manifest fact of commitment are not, apparently, undone by the rotten pardons that marked his last days in the White House. He plainly will not fade into civilian life and, as plainly, the nation doesn't want him to.  His reception in Harlem called up memories of another young ex-president. Theodore Roosevelt's second term ended when he was 50. After a year of travelling in Africa and Europe, in 1910 he too landed in New York, receiving, according to his biographer, "a truly royal welcome". The harbour was crowded, the city packed, the reception "like nothing ever given a private citizen coming back to his native land after a brief absence abroad". In response, Roosevelt remarked that "the role of sage had no attractions for him, but that he considered it both his privilege and duty to take active part in the discussion of public questions, commending or criticising as his judgment dictated".  In due course, Roosevelt couldn't restrain himself from going further. He ran   for a third term, an ambition barred to Clinton, much though he would surely like to do it. Their similarities, though, are striking. Teddy Roosevelt, a Republican president who became a Progressive, was plainly an early practitioner of the third way, decades before anyone had heard of Clinton or Tony Blair.   He had the same intense interest in the substance of social reform, cutting through conventional ideological labels. Clinton shares with Roosevelt a passion for engagement and the energy to apply it, together with the quasi-monarchical status that, admittedly, distinguishes an American head of state from a British head of government.  Being still young, Clinton has active years ahead of him as a national figure. He will be accorded special gravitas. Former presidents always are, if they want it. A week before Jimmy Carter handed President Bush the report on election reform, he delivered a scathing attack on several of his policies, notably national missile defence. "I have been disappointed in almost everything he has done," Carter said of Bush. It was an unusual exchange from one president to another. But it did not diminish Carter. Nor was it seen as invalidating what he had to say about elections. We miss that quality in our retired politicians. Our cohorts mostly despatch themselves into cushioned pettiness, fighting old party battles, removed from national service. Where was Ted Heath when you needed him? Sucking up to China, first-class.