Scouting the tundra that is New Labour, some Tories claim to know where it will break up. They think the issue will be Europe. Iain Duncan Smith is running his leadership bid on that misguided fantasy. Actually, the real fault line is about as uncomfortable for him as for Tony Blair. We see the beginnings of it in the Greenpeace escapades at Menwith Hill. For two days running, demonstrators broke past dozy guards at the American listening post in Yorkshire to make their point against national missile defence. It has been a perfect gesture: well-organised, attention-getting and sparking into life an argument the government was hoping to suppress. It also signals a contest in which the anaesthetic sibilance of New Labour will face its hardest struggle to put the instincts of the old left to sleep.  Unlike Europe, NMD strikes at the living heart and mind of Labour. As an issue of principle, Europe is dead. The socialist souls it stirs are barnacled with age. George Bush's missile defence schemes, by contrast, draw conscience and politicstogether to demand a statement about the modern world. Here the argument has only just begun. NMD's presumptions about the post-cold-war world challenge the European left to think seriously.  Mr Bush ended his recent visit apparently thinking he had it licked. Such was the briefing from spokesmen and spinners, especially in Washington and London. Europe, we were led to believe, agreed that there were missile threats from rogue states, and did not fundamentally oppose the US in its efforts to counteract them. The phrase "moral imperative" was even attributed to one European power, believed to be not a million miles from Madrid. The strategists, both political and military, of the Republican right sustain the assertion that, come what may, NMD is irreversible, will go ahead and - a more recent promise - will be deployed whether or not it has been proved to work.  The imperative has become political. "It is a simple question," the June 9 Washington Post quoted a Pentagon official as saying. "Is something better than nothing? The president and the secretary for defence have made it pretty clear that some missile defence in the near term is in fact better than nothing." The definition of near term appears to be set just before the end of Bush's first term as president.  The European response is in fact more fragmented, more aware than ever of the fragility of some of the claims coming out of the ultra-hawkish Pentagon, and the plethora of defence businesses that would be the only unambiguous gainers from NMD. There's a seamlessness between the Bush and Clinton missile programmes, and more evidence appearing of the critiques that were made of the Clinton approach even from within his administration.  In a telling piece in the new issue of Foreign Affairs, John Newhouse, who worked in the Clinton State Department, pours scorn on the threat-analysis that persuaded Clin ton he needed "red meat thrown to the rightwingers on the [Capitol] Hill". North Korea and Iran were depicted as capable, within a few years, of threatening the US with strategic missile systems. "But within and beyond the administration," writes Newhouse, "as well as within the intelligence bureaucracy itself, the threat was widely seen as greatly inflated." It reminded him of the later 1970s, "when cold warriors in and out of government exaggerated the strength of Soviet strategic forces, in part by intimidating the intelligence community and skewing the intelligence product."  The key player in both the late 70s and late 90s was Donald Rumsfeld, the present secretary for defence. "His agenda is modest," writes Newhouse. "He concentrates on just a few subjects, but these he routinely bulldozes into submission." Although, on his own recent visit to Europe, Rumsfeld continued to bulldoze - NMD is "simply inescapable", he said - many allies are becoming less not more willing to accept his analysis. The politeness they showed to Mr Bush masks the growing likelihood that any European government with a socialist element in its coalition will be working to oppose NMD, as a source of global instability which Washington has not succeeded in talking down.  In response, the British line is that it's too early to raise such alarms. Everyone should hold off arguing until we know more about Washington's real intentions. This is typically disingenuous. 
The missile defence system to which all efforts have been, albeit imperfectly, directed is space-based, rather than speculative and unresearched boost-phase interception. That means using Menwith Hill for satellite relay and, more offensively, Fylingdales as an integral element in the chain of early warning radar. Early NMD probably means early British involvement.  The Ministry of Defence sounds ambivalent about the prospect. Officials express their anxiety about being drawn into a misuse of our own stretched defence resources. Meanwhile, though, they scheme to be a part of it, in keeping with their special alliance. The instinct of defence officials not to get left out has no limit. The top brass are therefore now working to seek a place for British scientists on the NMD development teams. As one of the top military people told me not long ago, everything must always be done to reinforce the outwards signs of London's concurrence with Washington, for a simple reason: "If we disagree, we tend to find the door not slammed - but rather less wide open."  That axiom now faces a challenge from two quarters. The first is Europe. The objections to NMD focus on finding a credible balance between threat and response. As Newhouse argues, the biggest, and perhaps most answerable, threats to the US come from more immediate and less expensive items than first-generation ICBMs. Europe, he suggests, may want to get together with Vladimir Putin to make a realistic assessment of threats to their shared landmass. This would only be divisive between Europe and America if the Bush administration caused it to be.  The second challenge should be just as strong. Opposing NMD is not another bout of CND-ism. It's not about crypto-pacifism, or any other of the charges levelled at Labour in the 1980s. It says, along with many Americans, that NMD is not self-evidently benign, and may be a waste of money and stability. It insists the debate must go on in public before irrevocable decisions are made, which may in any case be impossible to carry out.  For Fylingdales is a more inflammatory target than Menwith Hill. Some in the ministry privately doubt whether its physical extension, necessary for NMD, could be done, in face of direct action against the American bulldozer and the desecration of the Yorkshire Moors. Minority protest could be forged into public opinion. There seems a good chance that Labour will become the agency where that opinion finds its voice, and thereby regain some self-respect  
<B>Exclusive audio</B><BR>John Vidal at Menwith Hill (3mins 04)