Four weeks after the election and it almost might not have happened. If elections are meant to bring an infusion of energy to the body politic, this one, seat for seat, was the deadest in living memory. This is not another treatise on the apathy of the voters, but is prompted by something scarier: the desiccated inanition, the droning indecision, of ministers. What a second dose of power seems to have done to them is not renew their purpose but redouble the unbearable caution which, in the first term, persuaded us to suspend every expectation. No sooner have they got back than they've started again on the long haul through the cliches of postponement until the end of the day when the dust never settles. Consider Stephen Byers, secretary of state for transport and a few other things. On Sunday, he had eight minutes on David Frost's sofa to state his case. His field of responsibility is in massive crisis. Transport affects the lives of far more people than either health or education. Rail service is collapsing, roads are slowing down, the London tube is going nowhere. We need to know what Byers will do. Instead we heard a man supremely complacent in the utter emptiness of what he had to say.  Asked about the trains, he admitted things were grim. But he was going to take command. "It's my responsibility to change that round and really give the industry a sense of focus and do the simple things," he grandly said. "Get trains running on time, safely, and comfortable. That's what the travelling public want." This was a startling insight. But how would he get the railway people to comply? "By saying to them they've got to focus on delivering the 10-year plan," he puffed. "And it's got to be done quickly, because travellers were fed up with the industry blaming other people and not taking responsibility."  This minister knows plenty about not taking responsibility. It is the kernel of his purpose. He was going to get on to Railtrack, he said. Railtrack would be pulling the operating companies together "to work out a new way forward". And Byers himself? The imperious command to Railtrack went forth from the Sunday sofa. They must, the minister insisted, "do that sooner rather than later". And if this didn't work? "There'll be more announcements in the next few weeks about the powers that we are using."  Not even the scandalous million-pound pay-off to Gerald Corbett, Railtrack's disgraced former chairman, could stimulate what might remain of Stephen Byers' capacity to share the indignation of the millions of travellers who now depend on him. When Frost put the question to him, he ran like a neutered rabbit to his burrow. That's not an issue for the secretary of state, he burbled. It was up to the shareholders. But isn't the government, in a way, the biggest shareholder? He was proud enough to say that "we are making significant investment in Railtrack", yet didn't seem to see any connection between this fact and the need to account, as a Labour minister, for Corbett's disgustingly generous treatment.  On petrol, we were offered the astounding dictum that "the British public will not tolerate a price for fuel which is excessive". On the tube, "we need to rule out privatisation" - as if anyone was any longer contemplating it. Throughout the piece, Byers sat in perfect comfort, oblivious to the embarrassment he deserved to feel, no doubt thinking he was doing well, shameless in his refusal to engage with a single policy question, unaware that he epitomised the worst of everything about New Labour: patronising, secretive, indecisive, terrified of breaking with the party line - a line whose commonest ingredient is that nothing should be said.  Watching this performance, I saw more clearly some of the characteristics of this government which, during the second term, seem likely to make us love it less and less.  First, it contains few ministers of any scale. Here was an experienced Cabinet minister who didn't have a single interesting idea about his new job. Like most of them, he is driven by the short-term news agenda, which means essentially remaining in defensive mode at all times. It's all that bothers him. Robin Cook and Clare Short rise above this, and David Blunkett may learn to. But Lord Chancellor Irvine has gone silent for years. The Byers approach, positively yearning for grey anonymity, is the template. The notion of the politician as leader, as challenger of received opinion, as generator of daring debate, is unimaginable in the cohorts of New Labour.  Second, this is a style not merely encouraged but insisted on by the only two ministers who are allowed to matter, Tony Blair and Gordon Brown. It has been the feature of their duumvirate.Fighting the battles in the war before last, they insist especially that there must be no perceived disagreements - except the ones they can't conceal between themselves. In most departments, no minister is supposed to have an idea that one of the two duumvirs hasn't had first - or at any rate run through every kind of personal security check.  This breeds a crippling shortage of political imagination. Blairites are a generation of timid politicians. For all I know, Stephen Byers may be a one-man cauldron of creativity. But he never lets it show. The retreat into committees and commissions and proposals "coming forward" and plans "we may look at" and all the other artefacts of unripe time is a move he makes by reflex instinct.   This is the style that comes from Blair's insistence on bilateral agreement rather than collective discussion, and from Brown's tireless efforts to impose a regime of fear. The hidden presence on Frost's sofa, ensuring that Byers made a fool of himself whenever he was asked to address the voters' concerns about transport, was the chancellor of the exchequer.  Third, though, we do have to return to apathy. The low voter turnout at the election, it is sometimes said, diminished Labour's mandate. I've heard it cited as a reason for the government to resume the ultra-caution with which it conducted itself from 1997 to 2001. This seems precisely the opposite of the truth. If there's a connection, it works the other way. It's the very timidity of ministers, their corporate greyness, the fact that the Cabinet has barely two personalities to rub together, which finds its echo in the electorate. If ministers are run according to a strategy that favours robotic vacuity on the part of almost all of them, why should the voters be expected to take them seriously enough to perform their own part in the democratic process?  The Byers performance was a little Sunday insult. Evidently it's the norm we're meant to accept, from a government that faces no political pressure except that which comes from its own failure to solve problems. It doesn't enlist people's support, but treats them as the enemy, in need of reassurance without promises, and condescension without commitment. I still believe the government can do better than that. But it has to be admitted that the first four weeks have set a style that seems to say the end of the day will never really come.