The government reshuffle made a lot of column mileage. Covering it was a journalistic duty, the journey being fuelled by many practitioners of the politician's trade, whose whispers became a form of necessary news. The large truth is that it will barely matter. Hardly anyone outside politics has reason to give a damn about the unchanged cabinet. This is not mere summer ennui, however. It states a truth about the uniquely unpolitical state of modern politics. The truth, murmured but unelaborated, is that there may not be enough talent for Mr Blair to choose from. He worries about this. The word from his circle is that there are too few stars making an irresistible case for promotion. What's left of the reshuffle is designed to test this proposition. The lower ranks - hoisting first-time ministers from the ranks of backbench Blairites - were always going to be more suggestive than the fate of old sweats by the names of Cunningham and Beckett and Mowlam. With luck, some stars will reveal themselves. Very possibly, however, Mr Blair is chasing a chimera of his own making.  For how does a politician become a star? When is he or she big? What is the route to mattering? Unless they look like making a difference, they can never hope to be heavy hitters. Yet the style of the Blairite hegemony is designed to produce the opposite kind of political creature. Last night's bet on stasis was further evidence of it.   Previous Labour governments were not short of big politicians. There were the usual obscure middle-weights, but there were also Castle, Healey, Benn, Jenkins. They were people of substance, who made a difference. They tended to be listened to. Why? Partly, no doubt, because they were the cream of the progressive crop. In their time politics was the highest pursuit a leftist could aspire to. There was academe and the civil service, but there were no consultancies, no lobbyists, no media that might satisfy such a person as a proxy for politics and a back-passage to power.  Yet there was another reason for these leaders' weight. They were independent spirits. They stood for something. A factionalised party produced factional chiefs who rose to prominence by argument, and remained there because of the portions of power they were seen to wield. Quite apart from her persuasive talents, Barbara Castle was a political force whom Harold Wilson could not ignore: ditto Tony Benn with Jim Callaghan. Roy Jenkins became a major politician, both prop and menace to Wilson, partly because it was recognised, at different moments, that he might soon be leader himself.  The politics of faction is the culture that Mr Blair has sworn to exorcise from the modern Labour party. He has already paid a price for it, and will deserve to pay more. We learn that political weight - the star quality he apparently misses - has some thing to do with political menace; some connection with independent credibility; some dimension of awkward separateness.  The same was evident under Mrs Thatcher. When Geoffrey Howe moved out from under her unchallenged command, he finally became a politician to reckon with in his own right. A colourless disciple, it is true, was chosen as her successor. But throughout the Tory period it was the ministers who stood for something often oblique to what the leader preferred - Clarke and Heseltine are good examples - and then became proven risk-takers for positions they believed in, who stayed in the heavy-hitting league.  The operational principle of Blairism is quite different. Such characters are not allowed, let alone encouraged. There are ministers who in their youth shared a platform with Tony Benn, but their self-validation as new Labour lies in the abjectness with which they watched their past draining out of them. Not only is faction banned and rebellion unthinkable, but evidence of an independent mind is proffered with caution - and then only by cabinet ministers exceptionally sure of their position.   This is a matter of circumstance as well as character. The demands for uniform spin have a mighty power to suppress discussion, let alone disagreement. The end of ideology has a similar fall-out on the system. The absence of faction, and therefore of the sub-potentates whose power came from faction, reflects a paucity of the issues around which the old doctrinal fury used to rage.  A good thing too, say Blair and his friends. Here we have a united party, shining eyes fixed on the progressive millennium, able to report all 177 manifesto pledges on course for keeping. Isn't GB plc doing well? Besides, don't voters hate a divided party? Isn't it for this reason that the famous second term, which eluded all those warring titans of the sixties and seventies, looks a near certainty?  Maybe. But the future political class look a rather threadbare lot. That is the way they are being formed and trained. The voters may eventually punish chronic division, but they don't admire a party of neutered robots, which is what Blairism requires its backbench politicians to be: as they're about to find out yet again, with the Millbank verdicts on their fidelity, and the Millbank invitation to constituencies to take action against back- sliders who have dared to show a sign of independence.  There are some able people in this government. But the climate doesn't encourage them to show that they are potent politicians. When Blairite insiders say that David Blunkett is able, they mean he has shown the will to do, as efficiently as possible, what the leader wants. When they say that Robin Cook has recovered from a bad start to become an important player, they mean he conducted Kosovo well, and now understands that his future lies entirely in mirroring Blair rather than posing as a threat to him. The fate of Mr Cook, once an independent force in the party, illustrates better than anything what has happened since the days when Harold Wilson fumed to Benn that Jenkins was about to unhorse him. As a politician, Mr Cook, like everyone else, seems to have little clout left.  The test of quality, instead of being political, is administrative, though with a side-glance at the sub-political art of media performance. Has the minister made progress with enough of the 177 items in the company prospectus? This is the benchmark question for the Blair project. All the cabinet evidently passed it. But if political stars are to reappear, it is the wrong question. It kills political talent. What the regime prefers are men in suits whose words will never sing, and women whose command of bullet-points ensures a reliable absence of imagination. None of them are meant to carry menace or even interest. That is why it's hard to care whether Cunningham came or went, or Ruth Sycophant is promoted under-secretary for bicycle bells.