In a recent conversation a Downing Street official came up with an arresting statistic. There are now, this official pointed out, more than 120 people in the British media who write regular week-in-week-out opinion pieces about domestic politics. The result, he went on, is that a large but unacknowledged change has taken place. The growth of this commentariat means that government now has to spend much more time worrying about the columnists than about the Conservatives, and more time defending itself against the media than against MPs. In one sense modern politics has moved beyond parties. In another, the columnists have become a new kind of party themselves. The sheer size to which the columnists' party has now grown is a fact to bring you up short. We have grown so used to conspiracy theories about the Blair government's media strategy that we tend to assume without a second thought that Alastair Campbell and his lieutenants have aggressively created and defined the tension with the media. But even Campbell has neither the numbers nor the resources to compete with 120 effective opponents. So, while the official was talking, it was possible to see it from his perspective. Basically, he was perpetually on the defensive. It must be like living under a constant air raid, I said. Tin hats are the order of the day, he replied.  Nothing about the events of December 2002 will have changed that in any way. Indeed absolutely everything about Cheriegate will have confirmed Downing Street's mentality more compellingly than ever. This has been an openly political battle, but parliament has had almost no part in it at all. Neither the Tories nor the Liberal Democrats have set the terms of debate. This has happened before, of course. This time it was the press that rattled the government's bunker. But before that, it was the Women's Institute, the petrol tanker drivers and the Countryside Alliance. In each case, the Blair government has been more vulnerable to the action of the extraparliamentary opposition - loosely defined - than that of the official opposition at Westminster.  This morning's Guardian-ICM poll is the other side of the same coin. This has been, by any standards, a terrible couple of weeks for the government, not just because of Mrs Blair, but because so many of its central projects in the public services - transport, pensions and university funding are this week's selection - look to be in a real mess. You might think, therefore, that a poll taken on the flood of all these misfortunes would show the government reeling and the opposition prospering. But you would be wrong. It is the Tories, not Labour, who are on their knees in the poll this week. As a result, Labour is ending the year with its strongest lead over the Tories - 14% - since April.  To most of us, the claim that the columnists' party now represents the main opposition to the government may seem a bit of a stretch. Few members of the public, after all, ever get to see the columnists in full-frontal array, armed for war, the way that government sees them. Most people either read no paper with any regularity, or just one or possibly two. Only politicians and the media village read the lot. The public sees the columnists one at a time. Seen from the Downing Street press office, on the other hand, they are a massed, daily onslaught, a seven-days-a-week challenge to the government's authority and credibility.  You could argue, as the editor of the Daily Mail apparently argues, that the media has simply taken up the sword that MPs and the official opposition have dropped. There is obviously some truth in this claim; Michael Heseltine, no friend of the Mail, has been saying much the same thing too. But the argument does not really stand scrutiny. The two forces are not interchangeable but complementary. They operate on different fronts. They present radically different kinds of threats.  The politicians are essentially opponents of the old school. They play by the old rules of formalised hostility in public but mutual respect in private. They march to the old rhythms, going home on Thursdays and stopping for the recess. And they are armed with traditional weapons, such as facts.  The columnists, by contrast, are a new form of combatant. They do not respect the people about whom they write. They operate every day of the year. And they use any weapons that come to hand. If MPs are the infantry and cavalry of political warfare, columnists are more akin to the armed terrorists against whom nation states are now sleeplessly defending.   An exaggeration? Clearly, not all the columnists are on the same side, operating to common rules. A select few remain what political commentators always were supposed to be, experienced and informed, knowledgeable about the things they describe, their judgments based on expertise and good contacts. Even the most frenzied of the papers normally have someone of this kind in their stable.  Many of the Blair government's recent assailants, though, do not fit this mould. Increasingly they are attitudinisers rather than analysts. Protagonists rather than reporters, and they pursue their trade unencumbered by either experience or the facts. The columns may be fun to read but, with the exceptions noted above, you will not learn anything either original or true from many of the 120.  The contrast with the much-maligned houses of parliament is very great. Watch a Westminster debate and, in contrast to reading a political column, the chances are that you will certainly learn something both original and true. Anyone with access to the BBC's cable parliamentary channel will know - or will at least be in a position to know - that Westminster debates, even today, are unfailingly informative and factual. Few MPs make speeches worthy of Demosthenes. But then few columnists write as well as Hazlitt or Swift either. But at least the MPs tend to know their stuff.  It is not just governments which pay a price for the new forms of politics - a politics epitomised in the Cheriegate saga. It is also the citizenry. It has become a cliche to say that politicians have become remote from the public, with the implication that somehow or other this is basically the fault of the politicians. But the reality is that it is the public that has moved away from politicians.  There is a paradox here. New Labour's battle with the columnists' party is the quintessence of modern politics. But it is not, in the end, an argument about the state of the real modern world. For that, you have to listen to MPs and peers of all parties as they struggle, in unreported debates and select committee hearings, to define and extend the boundaries of the possible in the modern world. To the columnists' party, all politicians have to be boring, craven and indistinguishable. But read or listen to a parliamentary debate and you will see what real politics can still be about. If the columnist party doesn't destroy it, that is. · 