In the summer of 2002 Tony and Cherie Blair got an invitation from the Queen. The invitation was to attend the pop concert in the Buckingham Palace grounds to mark Elizabeth II's golden jubilee. But it was not issued to the prime minister and his wife alone. The Queen made a particular point of inviting the Blairs' three teenage children too. Put yourself in the Blairs' position for a moment. Do you take the kids? Or do you leave them at home? It was, after all, a personal invitation from the head of state to the prime minister and his family on a national occasion. To refuse would be impossible. But to accept would be to run the risk of exposing the fiercely protected Blair children to the spotlight. Why - apart from the fact that, in many teenage eyes, the concert line-up was almost a who's who of the terminally uncool - should the Blairs' kids not go along with their parents for such an evening?  In almost any other society than Britain the answer would have been a no-brainer. Neither the ethics nor the appropriateness of accepting such an invitation would have been a problem. The children would have gone, and few would have noticed or cared. But though the Blair children did, in the end, attend the Buckingham Palace concert, they did so only after agonised discussion about whether it was worth the risk that the tabloids might make it an issue. Even so, the Blair children sat separately that evening, in the crowd, away from their parents in the VIP box, away from the cameras.  The anecdote says a lot about the pressures and dilemmas of the world that the Blairs inhabit. It shows, contrary to some claims, that the prime minister and his wife are acutely aware that in Britain there are lines that they either must not cross or should not cross. It is a reminder too, that many of the lines are drawn by the media.  What is shows above all, however, is the sheer degree to which the private life of public people in the modern world is a diminished zone. For most of us, the moral dilemmas of everyday life consist of small, occasional things. But in the world of modern politicians and modern media, nothing is small and nothing is occasional. Everything matters - always. Every step outside the bubble in which you are condemned to live is a step into territory in which unseen enemies may lurk. It is a state of siege with which few of us could cope and in which even fewer of us would avoid mistakes.  Ten days into what now seems doomed to become known as Cheriegate, several things have become clear. We know that Cherie Blair has some odd friends. We know that she is very loyal to them. We sense that she thinks the Daily Mail is out to get her. And we know that she made a big mistake by not coming right out, telling the truth and saying sorry. A senior Labour lawyer with whom I spoke yesterday pointed out that nothing is more difficult, as a prosecutor, than to cross-examine a defendant who has said sorry. Sorry wins the jury's sympathy every time.  We know too that the position of prime minister's spouse has changed forever. Granted, some special factors differentiate Cherie Blair's case from her predecessors: her high-profile career, and that she has children living at home. But she is also the first prime minister's wife to live full-time in Downing Street in the era of the 24-hour news cycle. She will not be the last. She is having to find her way in a country without maps.  One of the ways she has done this is to build a support system. She is very careful about that circle, and it is kept very narrow. Peter Foster came into it completely by chance, and certainly not at her request. It is hardly surprising, given what has happened over the past 10 days, that there is such a degree of paranoia in No 10 about these issues. But the problems will exist for the Blairs' successors too. If one thing comes out of the current furore, it is that a prime minister's spouse needs official staff and status too.  But to claim that this is part of a tide of sleaze lapping at the steps of the entire Blair government, as a Daily Mail columnist said yesterday, is demented stuff. To assert, as the Telegraph editorial said at the weekend, that Cheriegate is proof of institutionalised mendacity is ludicrous exaggeration. But these are the things that people begin to write, and others begin to believe, when the siege engine takes over.  As this paper's correspondent in Washington during Bill Clinton's embattled second presidential term, I thought I had learned most of what there is to learn about modern political siege warfare in the years of the Lewinsky crisis and the failed impeachment of the president. But after watching the British press go after the Blairs in recent days I am not so sure. We seem to be heading off down a similar track.  There are, of course, some big differences. Clinton was the elected president, for one. Cherie Blair is merely the spouse of the elected PM. Clinton had lied to cover up an affair. Not even Cherie Blair's most relentless foes have gone that far. Morally, Clinton and Cherie Blair inhabit different universes.  But the similarities between Washington 1998 and London 2002 are becoming striking. In both cases, the momentum of the allegations is marked by relentless obsession. It is beginning to be possible to say almost anything to keep the story running. Quite small and obscure details are now beginning to provide a daily justification for the story to stay on the front page.  But the major difference between Washington 1998 and London 2002 relates to who is driving it. In the effort to hound Clinton from office, the running was mostly made by politicians. The US media was, in many respects, only a reluctant participant in their efforts. And constitutional safeguards were in place which allowed the president to survive.  In what has now become an effort to exploit Cherie Blair's errors in order to drive her husband from office, the alignment of forces here is different. Here, it is the press which is driving the process. The politicians, so far at least, have been much more reticent, and are coming under increasing pressure from the media to join the attack - the converse of what happened in the US.  We need to ask ourselves whether this difference is one we are happy to live with. This is not to imply that a prime minister and his wife can be absolved from the general need for vigilance in the conduct of public life, or that they should be excused when they make wrong judgments. Nor does it mean that events like Cheriegate do not matter, either in terms of personal conduct or political consequences. But unless we understand, with at least some human sympathy and some institutional awareness, that these pressures are altogether more intense and unremitting than in the past - and that our modern institutions have not been properly prepared to deal with them - then we will be doomed to learn nothing from the present crisis and to go on recreating it in future.  