For a moment, it was glad confident morning again. If the prime minister and chancellor of the exchequer are really arguing about the contents of next year's budget, what better subject for a thoroughly socialist disagreement than the rival merits of more spending on public services and additional direct help for low-income families? It is just like old times.  But since I regard a harmonious relationship between Blair and Brown as essential to the government's success, I offer them a peace formula. Invest more in both.  Redistribution by stealth - a feature of New Labour's social policy - can only carry the battle forward so far. To win the war against poverty, there must be an immense increase in resources devoted to families at the foot of the earnings table.  There is only one place from which the money can come. That judgment is endorsed by David Piachaud of the London School of Economics in the current issue of the Political Quarterly.  He begins with warm congratulations to the government for the progress that has been made in reducing child poverty - a public echo of a private rebuke administered to me some months ago because of my failure to acknowledge New Labour's success. Then he describes how far we have still to go.  "Child poverty remains higher than [it was] in 1979," and "Britain still has the highest child poverty rate of any major industrialised country apart from the United States". Even after the government's "remarkable achievement" of reducing "child poverty by over 1m", 4m children (one in three) live in poverty. And, to me, the most disturbing fact of all: "50,000 children, aged eight to 10, have nothing to eat or drink before going to school in a morning".  The special horror of that final statistic is easily explained. Poverty - described in numbers and income levels - is, or ought to be, eradicable. Improve the minimum wage. Increase tax credits or the level of income guarantees. But there is an unavoidable suspicion that many of those unhappy 50,000 children are the victims of private rather than public failure.  And private failure is not so easily redeemed. Surely every family should be able to afford a daily cup of tea and slice of toast. Some of them are the victims of society's failure. But bad habits are not easily changed. An extra £5 a week will not solve the problem.  That depressing conclusion leads naturally to the most controversial part of Piachaud's paper. No one will argue with his assertion that children's prospects are determined by the physical, social and cultural environment in which they live, the quality and extent of education and health provision - and their families.  But Piachaud reminds us that, in Britain, "families are a private matter" and that "privileged neo-liberals decry any intervention in the private sphere as the nanny state or social engineering".  The laissez faire approach not only abdicates responsibility for the relationship between parents and children. It prohibits interference in the workings of a corrosive triangle - parents, children and the commercial pressures upon them.  Piachaud calls it "pester power", TV-inspired agitation to own trainers and wear jeans that are embellished with the right label. All over Britain parents are now being put under Harry Potter pressure. Families who cannot afford the assorted tat are made to feel their poverty. Neo-liberals will ask who decides that buying some tawdry toy or contrived game is wrong? The answer is anyone who thinks it is important for children to be sent to school with a breakfast inside them.  In this, as in other matters, Britain is ridiculously reluctant to impose the slightest constraint on human behaviour. Quebec - a province of a capitalist country which regulates the provision of private medicine - prohibits all TV advertising aimed at children. So does enlightened Sweden - though protection of vulnerable families is undermined by Murdoch's satellite beamed from Britain.  Although Piachaud does not say so, TV itself is part of the debilitating problem. Not only do teenagers agitate for their own sets. Educational research confirms that toddlers, with innumerable channels to choose from, have a smaller attention span than those without. They spend their formative years zapping a remote control and, mentally, they zap for the rest of their lives. Even as I read Piachaud's conclusion, I could hear the chorus of derision that his recommendations are bound to provoke.  He wants "a serious strategy" to improve the quality of children's lives. That has to mean that parents are sometimes denied the right to make the wrong choices. Neo-liberals insist that freedom must include the liberty to make mistakes. What right does anyone have to worship an idea which sends 50,000 eight to 10-year-olds to school cold and hungry?