Nobody should be surprised that metropolitan journalists - who always hated devolution - have seized on the fall of Henry McLeish as evidence that the Scottish parliament is a political fiasco.  When Donald Dewar was alive they accused him of being in Downing Street's pocket and governing north Britain as Tony Blair's satrap. After his death they turned through an inelegant 180 degrees and denounced McLeish as too independent for Scotland's own good. Now he is gone, his resignation - the result of misjudgments made in Westminster long before the Scottish parliament was first convened - is used as proof that no politician of real ability or standing would condescend to serve in such a tin-pot institution.  The reputation of the Scottish parliament was not improved by Tony Blair's patronising threnody that McLeish was "growing into the job". He had grown into the job already and at least two of the candidates who hope to succeed him would lead Scotland with distinction. I am a Wendy Alexander man, simply because Donald Dewar hoped she would become first minister one day. But I have no doubt that Jack McConnell can continue the process which began on the day when the Queen and a clearly delighted, but equally embarrassed, first minister drove together through Edinburgh.  The policies which the Edinburgh parliament has introduced exclusively for Scotland have made that country, in many ways, a better place to live than England. Elderly Scots receive free personal domiciliary care. David Blunkett's ghastly error over student grants and tuition fees - soon to be remedied in England - was reversed in Scotland as soon as the parliament received the necessary power. Teachers' wages have been increased to a level which guarantees both supply and morale. Would that Edinburgh could impose its will on the whole United Kingdom.  And it is not just Scottish devolution that has been a success. Marvel at the words of the Welsh minister for education, as she dismissed the introduction of specialist schools, tests for seven-year-olds and greater private involvement in the management of schools. Her policies, she said, "steer away from basic reliance on centrally driven, competitively inspired and commonly damaging approaches". In Northern Ireland, where everybody except Ian Paisley's extremists believes in devolution, secondary school selection is soon to end.  Devolved government creates a real problem for members of London's fashionable establishment. It confirms that policies they describe as new, and insist are necessary, are regarded as decrepit and discredited in more enlightened parts of the UK. Scotland and Wales have never been New Labour. Devolution has allowed both countries to struggle free of "the project". Given the chance, Yorkshire and Hotspur country from the Tyne to the Tees will do the same.  Sadly, poor, deprived England rarely hears the good news from Scotland and Wales. Reports from Cardiff and Edinburgh usually describe problems created by the refusal of central government to accept that power was passed out to the national parliaments so that they could take their own decisions. The Welsh assembly got off to a bad start not because Wales insisted on choosing its own first secretary, but because Tony Blair tried to make the choice himself.  Anyone who doubts that devolution is now on the march need only consult the opinion formers of the northeast where John Prescott and Stephen Byers preached the gospel of regional government last Friday. Up there in Northumberland and Durham they have seen Scotland speak up for itself. When Scottish ministers go to Europe or America to drum up trade and investment, they argue for Scotland. When the Westminster secretaries of state make the same trip, they have to balance the interest of all the English regions. Newcastle is entitled to claim that Glasgow has an unfair advantage.  The idea of the English regions speaking for themselves is a matter of practical necessity, not the product of historical romance. The demand for the nations and regions to have their own voice is going to spread south from Edinburgh. Unlike the Young Pretender, it will not stop at Derby.  Devolution is based on a hard fact that much of the London media is too sentimental to accept. The old nation state - basically a 19th-century creation - is, in the modern world, too small to take some decisions and too big to take others. Power has to be passed up to Europe and out to the devolved parliaments and assemblies. In a hundred years' time, politicians will marvel that anyone ever thought otherwise. And Henry McLeish will be remembered as one of the pioneers who helped to see the Scottish parliament through its most difficult days.