Last Wednesday afternoon, the prime minister came dangerously close to revealing his theory of government. Perhaps the 17 words that gave the game away were included in the carefully prepared text from which he read his speech on the opening afternoon of the new parliament. But I doubt it. The construction was too colloquial to have passed the syntactical scrutiny of the civil service. And his well-known distaste for political theory seems likely to have prevented him from saying, in cold blood, anything that might expose him to the accusation that he was flirting with philosophy. The assertion was almost certainly impromptu. That makes it more likely that he really does believe that "on the basis of the opportunities we are giving, we are entitled to demand responsibilities in return". Whatever its origins - intellect or adrenaline - the aside represented a simplistic version of the principle that increasingly informs the government's programme. Rights must be matched with responsibilities. It is an idea worth examining - after we have disentangled it from some of the prime minister's de haut en bas prejudices about the lower orders of society. Nobody "gives" rights. Some of them are, as the Americans say "inalienable". Others have to be earned. But none of them are gifts from a benevolent government or ruling class. If they were, they would not be rights.  And who are the "we" who, according to the prime minister, demand responsible conduct in return for the new opportunities? Not, I am sure, the New Labour government. Even Tony Blair would pause before suggesting that Downing Street hands out life-chances like sweets to good children. The "we" can only be the prosperous classes who fund the extra investment in schools and hospitals. Recipients beware. Spray-paint graffiti on school walls or dump your old furniture in the local canal and standard-rate taxpayers may decide that you are unworthy of their largesse.  The extra expenditure that is devoted - let us say - to the inner cities ought not to be contingent on the way a hooligan minority of their inhabitants behave. That is not to say that we should be untroubled by all those items of bad conduct that the government hopes to legislate away in its anti-social behaviour bill. On the contrary. And no one should doubt that the possession of better services is intimately related to the eradication of such practices. But the houses, the jobs, the medical care and the improved education are neither a bribe or a reward. They are a cure.  It is not because St John"s Wood is free of original sin that its telephone kiosks are less vandalised than those in Lambeth. It is because the social conditions of the two are different. Tony Blair should remember the codicil that Gordon Brown added to his promise to be tough on crime. The government needs to be tough on the causes of petty crime. To improve society we have to change it. That is, I know, what the prime minister dismisses as "Marxist determinism". But it is true.  That truth does not rule out the notion of a social contract. The partnership of rights and responsibilities can be applied with advantage in the areas where anti-social behaviour is greatest. But the theory - sensible enough when set out by Professor Sir Bernard Crick but increasingly irrelevant the further it gets from its only true begetter - cannot be worked out in the language of punishment and gratitude. It is, in its way, an extension of the doctrine of self-interest.  Primitive man prevented life from being nasty, brutish and short by the tacit agreement to cooperate with his natural enemies in order to improve the chances of survival. In the modern world, the social contract can only mean that everyone who has a reasonable chance of benefiting from changes in society would be sensible to assist in bringing them about. Most of the young men on whom the anti-social behaviour bill is focused do not believe that they have the slightest hope of enjoying the material good life that they see exalted on television. It is no good telling them that they had a chance of winning a place in a city technology college. They know that the diversity of which the prime minister speaks so warmly is designed to divide them from the prosperous suburbs.  They will not be treated in the new foundation hospitals or win places at universities that charge top-up fees. Instead they will remain in the decaying council estates - like those in Birmingham - that are neither repaired nor renovated because the government will not finance improvements as long as the houses remain in the public sector. The young hooligans who live in those conditions will play fair by society only when they feel that society is playing fair by them. Demanding responsibility as the legitimate entitlement of the establishment will change nothing. The social contract requires the disadvantaged and the dispossessed to be made a decent offer.  