The latest round of mayoral elections have produced exactly the results that the critics of the bright idea predicted - low turnouts, encouragement of extremism and the elevation of personality over policy. And there is no reason to assume that the future of the innovation will be any more sensible. The campaign, which has already begun in London, is far more concerned with Ken Livingstone's character than with either his record or his programme.  Supporters of the incumbent mayor - in a city with every urban problem from crime to gridlock - constantly extol his sunny nature. If Livingstone survives into a second term, it will be because Londoners think of him as "Jack the Lad", applaud his cheeky-chappy attitude to authority and admire his mildly unconventional choice of suits. Add that to the election of the Robocop in Middlesbrough and the Monkey Man in Hartlepool and it is clear that mayoral elections guarantee that the silly season lasts all year round.  Much to his credit, Livingstone was profoundly opposed to the idea of elected mayors - before he became one. But he has yet to comment on the absurdity which seems likely to guarantee that, in London, the prospect of a serious mayoral contest may evaporate before the real election begins. Nicky Gavron - the Labour hopeful who claims she is the favourite to become the party's official candidate - seems less anxious to replace Livingstone than to endorse his record.  It would be wrong to suggest that Ms Gavron sees herself as the surrogate for the man who, after failing to win the Labour nomination, deserted the party and stood as an independent. But even if she does not support Ken Livingstone, Ken Livingstone has every reason to support her. Her advice on how Labour voters should mark their ballots when the mayoral election is eventually held provided the Livingstone campaign with the biggest boost it has yet received.   The election is still 18 months away. Yet Ms Gavron has already announced that, if she becomes Labour's nominee, she will ask her supporters to cast their "second preferences" - a feature of London's complicated voting system - for the once red Ken. That request is wholly consistent with her claim to be "the candidate of continuity". But a contestant who promises to carry on the good work of the incumbent is hardly likely to defeat the man whose record she so obviously admires.  A careful examination of her public pronouncements raises doubts about whether or not Ms Gavron really wants to see Livingstone defeated. For she clearly sees him as a real socialist implementing real socialist policies. That might just be true if socialism is defined in the language of China circa 1975 and the cult of the personality. Like Livingstone, Mao Zedong had his picture painted on the back of new buses.  It is more difficult to understand why a mayor, who is about to introduce a "congestion charge", could even be described as progressive. It is a poll tax on motorists - easily paid by business drivers and the prosperous middle classes. The people who will be hit, often so hard that they are kept out of London, are the low income families from the poorer suburbs who occasionally want to bring their elderly Fords or Vauxhalls into the West End. Requiring the less well off to bear the burden of traffic control may be Mayor Livingstone's idea of socialism. It is not mine.  The choice before London is so byzantine and bizarre that there is some attraction in an idea canvassed by Richard Heller - sometime adviser to Denis Healey and Gerald Kaufman. Heller is promoting a "write-in campaign" that aims to make Herbert Morrison the Labour nominee. He "cleared slums and built low-cost housing, made London healthier - created new jobs and gave London a public transport policy to be proud of". I would support Heller's initiative with enthusiasm were his candidate not to suffer from one major handicap. Morrison died in 1965.  So London will be left with a choice between an as yet unselected Tory, a Liberal no-hoper and the three competitors for the Labour nomination - Ms Gavron, Bob Shannon (the sadly silent former leader of the Harrow council) and Tony Banks. Unfortunately Mr Banks, briefly sports minister and long-time Labour MP, suffers from one of the most dangerous of all political diseases. He possesses a sense of humour.  Because of his capacity for one-liners, Mr Banks has become the funny man of Westminster. But, as every opera lover knows, a serious heart usually beats inside a comic exterior. The paradox of the London mayoral election is that a sensible man will be wrongly portrayed by his critics as ridiculous, as he argues that the ridiculous job to which he aspires has serious value. The best we can hope for is that the campaign for Mayor of London convinces the major parties that the whole idea is absurd.   