Dr William Griffiths is what the health service calls a "single handed principal". In the official register of primary care, his is the only name listed under the heading of the Paradise Road Practice, Richmond, Surrey TW9. However the notice board outside the house also offers the services of Dr Mark Scriminger. Dr Griffiths employs an assistant to help him care for his list of 3,000 patients.  The Paradise Road Practice is, Dr Griffiths explains, organised on the lines of the government's personal medical service scheme, which is a step towards salaried employment replacing independent contracting. Employing an assistant spares Dr Griffiths the irksome obligations of partnership and Dr Scriminger - married to a consultant who will soon want to move out of London - is free to follow his wife whenever he chooses to do so.  It would be wrong to describe Dr Griffiths as old fashioned in his attitude to medicine, but he is certainly old fashioned in his attitude to life. He admits difficulty in mastering his computer, these days as important to the practice of medicine as the stethoscope. And he claims the statistics which reveal his success in hitting the government's targets are beyond his comprehension.  The immunisation obligation is - in most GPs minds - second only to the cervical smear test target as an object of hatred and ridicule. Whether or not they believe in the efficacy of the triple vaccine - and a majority of them do - the notion that they must persuade parents to accept it for their children, or suffer substantial financial penalties, is regarded as inconsistent with medical ethics since it offers a financial inducement to advocate a specific treatment. Dr Griffiths, like most members of his profession, has no doubt that the success of his work depends on the creation of a bond of trust that binds him to his patients. They must not suspect him of prescribing to protect his salary.  The son of a surgeon, Dr Griffiths toyed with the idea of hospital work but decided against specialisation. "No single speciality was sufficiently absorbing to make me want to know all the small print." The emphasis is firmly on caring. He is happily engaged in one of the innovations which, although designed to improve the efficiency of patient care, can easily be misinterpreted as another example of the vogue for production line medicine.  Because Paradise Road is a metropolitan practice it is able to refer its patients to the cardiac department of a rapid diagnosis clinic. "There they are examined by a process which leaves them untouched by human hand. They pass from one investigation to another, very often without seeing a doctor." A cardiac specialist then sees the results and a report then goes to the GP whose job it is to explain what treatment is necessary. "It is one way in which pressure on hospital beds can be relieved without detriment to the patient."  Asked if he believed that morale was as low and discontent was as great as the propagandists of the BMA suggested, Dr Griffiths said "there was quite a lot of truth" in the gloomy conclusions. Then he volunteered that he was one of the doctors who signified willingness to resign from the NHS unless what the BMA called "an acceptable new contract" was negotiated with the government. Dr Griffiths signed the letter "after taking a big breath" and he wes "not sure what it will mean financially". He would go on treating his patients but hopes that the BMA "has something up its sleeve as a secret contingency plan. We can't just resign without having some idea how we live while we look after our patients."  Among Dr Griffiths's complaints was his objection to "the incredibly complex bureaucracy", which he said now hampered his work. "This fax arrived today - 15 pages of it. It tells us how we can apply for the various pots of money if we qualify." The document, Investing in Primary Care, described how £100m was to be distributed by primary care trusts - offering something like £10,000 a practice. But its "intention is to incentivise (sic) and invest in local initiatives that lead to real sustainable improvements in service delivery". Incentivising - as well as being an interesting addition to the language - takes many forms.  Dr Robert Furness - one of five partners in a Sunningdale practice in Berkshire - gave an example of what many GPs would regard not so much as an inducement as an affront. Pressure to prescribe cheaper obesity drugs was applied to doctors in his area by the circulation of a league table in which various degrees of extravagance (or frugality) were exposed.  Some 600 private patients are registered with the Sunningdale doctors and 60% of the families on the practice's health service list have private health insurance. Dr Furness said that the practice would be "unmanageable" were a majority of his patients not able to take a short cut to hospital treatment. In his area it took three months for an NHS patient with cataracts to see a consultant and another year before the operation was performed. Private patients saw the specialist in two weeks and were admitted to hospital for the operation within two months.  Dr Furness's problems - both the pressure to reduce drug costs and the difficulties of finding hospital beds - are exacerbated by the nature of the area in which he works. In Greater Windsor patients return home from the surgery and use the internet to check the ingredients in their prescriptions and compare waiting times.  It would be interesting to know if the residents of Berkshire would accept some of the idiosyncrasies of Dr Griffiths's socially mixed practice. In a frank description of the way in which his practice runs he illustrated how much discretion remained with GPs. "I personally don't have the enthusiasm for performing minor surgery. We have got a few instruments to cut out a few skin lesions. My colleague, Mark, tends to do that. He's keener on that sort of thing than I am."  Because the government relies on targets - with bonuses for success and penalties for failure - the creation of a national standard of care makes personal choices easier for pa tients but more difficult for doctors. Will the essential commitment to exceeding the call of duty survive the increasing obligation to demonstrate that the duty is done?  Downstairs in one of the Paradise Road consulting rooms the practice nurse was preparing to assist Dr Scriminger to remove a small growth which he thought ought to be examined at the hospital's path lab. She said she was determined to go on taking blood samples, even when a regional phlebotomy service was set up to relieve the individual practices of that duty. "I can talk to the patients while I am doing it. Find out about their general health." Unintentionally she had provided the perfect example of why general practice cannot be totally regulated. The BMA is in the process of renegotiating a new general practitioners' contract. Somehow the intangible concept of service has to be included in the remuneration formula.  For most general practitioners life is far easier than it was for the family doctors of 50 years ago. They delivered most of the practice's babies, dressed minor wounds, gave routine injections and were on 24 hour call to patients who, possessing neither telephones nor transport, needed regular home visits.  Dr Scriminger, assistant to Dr Griffiths in Richmond and Kew, said that one of the attractions of general practice was now its congenial hours. If the government's hope of increasing hospital doctors was realised "they will be doing shift work". GPs can, with the help of syndicated night relief, be on almost permanent days.  Yet, in other ways, a GP's life has become more exacting. Over the years, bedside manner has declined in importance. GPs' dissatisfaction is, to a degree, discounted by the fact that they have been regularly dissatisfied for the last 50 years. When the NHS was created, they so resented the idea of becoming salaried state employees that they insisted upon being self-employed medical contractors.  Resentment is always greatest when a new contract is being negotiated. So, before the new "framework" was agreed, in some parts of England, militancy began to break out. If the detailed discussions fail, and the battle is resumed, the fight will not be entirely about money. The new deal the family doctors demand will reduce their workload. A BMA poll showed that 92% of GPs agreed that too much was being asked of them. But 40% would take on more work for extra pay. But "most GPs did not want to lose income by shedding it". More than 80% thought the level of their income too closely associated with the number of patients on their lists.  At least they have a case for a reduced workload. The best doctors want the opportunity to spend more time with their patients. Somehow, a government which plans to make the NHS "more patient focused" will have to make that possible. The government aim is to have 2,000 additional GPs in place by 2004. But even if that target is achieved on time, the extra hours of possible consultation time which it produces may be swallowed up in completing forms about targets.  On the "front line" - the government's own description of general practice - there is always contempt for the troops who provide logistic support from the well-protected dug-outs. But resistance to nationally imposed targets has to be measured against the willing acceptance of regulations which they are judged to benefit the service.  Dr Suraj Sharma, in Liverpool, regards avoiding expensive branded drugs as "just common sense". But he still asks: "Why does a man come round and ask me complicated time-wasting questions and then, a month or two later, another man comes and does the same?"  The process about which Dr Sharma complains is "monitoring" - the inevitable corollary to standards and targets. If the government's plans for primary care are achieved, general practitioners will be expected to accept more checks, not less.  They believe that their success depends on personal knowledge and judgment. The best way of improving primary care may well be increasing resources and allowing the GPs to get on using them as they judge best.