The area around Liverpool's Westminster medical centre is pock-marked with boarded up council houses, open spaces which were once factories and run down public houses. It is approached along James Larkin Way - a tribute to the Irish who settled there to work in the docks between the wars.  A GP's life is particularly hard in the inner cities where caseloads are often 30% higher than the typical patients' list. Suraj Sharma confirms the diagnosis. "Nobody wants to take on inner city patients." He admits that, despite a devotion to Merseyside which has grown with the years, he "did not choose Liverpool". Twenty years ago it was the only place in which he could find a partnership.  Even that required accepting what he now calls "a lot of exploitation". Dr Sharma, a graduate of the medical school at Alahmabad, came to Britain, via Fiji, in 1978. After the year in which his Indian qualification was "validated" by the General Medical Council he began work in Stockton-on-Tees. There followed long, hard months as locum and practice assistant (sometimes in the same practice) before he realised how hard it was for an overseas doctor to get a good job. After he discovered the hard truth he decided to try his luck in the medically unpopular Liverpool inner city.  For a time he scraped together £300 a month by working long hours for whichever practice would give him temporary work. Then, while travelling between one job and another, he was badly injured in a road accident. One of the doctors by whom he was employed visited him in Warrington general hospital and, in the course of the bedside conversation, offered Sharma a soon-to-be-vacant partnership. The offer was conditional. Until the two incumbents retired, he would be expected to do all the nights, weekends, house calls. Sharma believes that the elderly doctors were sympathetic towards overseas doctors because "being members of the Jewish community, they had found similar problems after the war".  There are "only 10 or 15 people, three or four families", from the ethnic minorities in Dr Sharma's practice. So Indians of any sort are something of a local novelty. But the overwhelming majority of Liverpudlians "have absolutely no prejudice". Two or three times a year "there may be funny comments from awkward patients. That's all". Resistance against Asian doctors has come from "the doctors' community" - or at least it did 20 years ago.  Perhaps the antagonism has declined because so few Asian doctors now come to Britain - a reduction which, Sharma believes, will cause a problem in areas of great deprivation. "Most of the extra doctors the government promises will not want to work in the inner cities".   Difficult to treat  The socially disadvantaged are difficult to treat but easy to satisfy. The problem for doctors in Liverpool's poorer areas is not that patients are aggressive or over-demanding but that they do not demand enough. Dr Sharma constantly battles against self-neglect. Most of his patients eat the wrong food. In his surgery, the racks of leaflets which offer patients medical guidance are dominated by pamphlets on one subject. A Healthy Eating Guide for the Ones to Fives. Diet Tips for Patients. The Balance of Good Health. In the land of the chip butty and the deep-fried Mars Bar, the advice is rarely heeded. And many of the men and women who eat the wrong food smoke heavily and drink to excess. Then, when they fall ill, they refuse to take their treatment seriously. Mrs Sharma - her husband's practice manager -says that one of her big problems is patients' failure to keep hospital appointments.  On Dr Sharma's own analysis, 5% of his patients waste his time. "They are the people who come to the surgery and say, 'Can I have a sick note?' or 'Will you write a letter saying that I am too ill to go to court?' I think, if they can come to the surgery, they can go to the court". However he finds it "difficult to challenge them just in case they are really sick". Occasionally, certain that the request comes from a malingerer, he refuses the request and "once or twice a year there is a nasty incident".  But the odd threat has not reduced his commitment to the area. Sometimes his Irish patients - especially if they are discussing what he calls "socio-medical problems" make the mistake of calling him "Father" instead of "Doctor". No doubt the mistake is encouraged by the Catholic holy picture which hangs on his consulting room wall. Dr Sharma, a Muslim, wants his patients to feel at home. "Most of the pious Catholics are quite elderly. The new generation is different". There are no problems about contraception and termination which might not arise in any other practice.  The Westminster medical centre houses the surgeries of three doctors - each one working independently of the others as a single practitioner. Dr Sharma was, for a time, in partnership with Satish Gupta - whose name is still prominently displayed in the waiting room. The partnership was dissolved five years ago and the consulting room is now occupied by a locum. Back in October 2001, Dr Gupta admitted - in the course of a misconduct hearing before the General Medical Council - that he had failed to identify the early symptoms of breast cancer in two women who subsequently died. The GMC agreed that Dr Gupta could continue working at the Westminster but insisted that, at least for a time, he was supervised while making breast examinations. He chose to take early retirement.  Dr Sharma refuses to discuss the downfall of his colleague. But there must be a gloomy suspicion that Dr Gupta's mistakes were, at least in part, the product of the problem of practices in deprived areas. Most GPs say that they have too many patients and too little time in which to see them. In inner cities the pressure on time often makes proper care impossible.  Although Dr Sharma works 50 hours a week, his workload is lightened by the assistance of a part-time nurse, a "lady doctor" who holds one surgery a week and a midwife from the local maternity hospital. On a typical day he makes two or three home visits - confining them, when he can, to the housebound and the seriously ill. After his unhappy years as a locum, he does avoid uncongenial hours so night calls are taken by what he calls "the commercial locum service" which he prefers to the "cooperative" which would expect him to take his turn on the late shifts.  For simple cases, he finds diagnosing by telephone easy "if you know the patient". As compared with many hospital doctors, it does not sound a bad life. But he remains oppressed by the problem which all GPs face. At his daily surgery he can only spend a few minutes with each patient. Longer time would enable him to anticipate illnesses he might prevent.   Reduced caseload  There are 2,000 patients on Dr Sharma's list. It has been longer but, fearful that he was spreading his time too thinly, he has allowed natural wastage to reduce his caseload. The three middle-aged men, still in the waiting room late on a Friday morning, agreed that at Westminster "nothing is too much trouble". It is the doctor who feels that consultations are sometimes hurried, not the patients.  Liverpool occupies a place high on the Jarman Index of social and economic deprivation. Some areas of the city are more deprived. But the Westminster medical centre treats all the psychological illnesses of poverty. And psychological illness leads to physical disease. "The unemployed naturally get depressed. And the problems of sitting at home - particularly the females who in an area like this do not go out to pubs and clubs as regularly as the men - is that they start smoking and drinking. You will not be surprised to learn that Liverpool has an abnormally high rate of lung cancer and this area is worse than most of the city."  Dr Sharma believes that "areas like this are beginning to receive the resources they need. But it will take years to catch up". On his analysis catching up requires, more than any other improvement, more general practitioners. Ideally an inner city list should be "1,200 - certainly no more than 1,500 - patients."  Of course he wants the reduction to come about without loss of earnings. An improvement in salary - or "remuneration" as doctors like to call it to emphasise their self-employed status - might be negotiated by the BMA. It is more difficult to imagine how the new, and better paid, doctors would be attracted to the areas of deprivation. But at least one improvement - central to the government's hopes of a more patient sensitive service - seems likely to continue.  Dr Sharma is eloquent about the quality of care in the inner city areas in what he calls "the bad old days" - an era of neglect which he identifies as ending in 1996. "The doctors and nurses did their best, but the facilities were just not there". The Bradley Street premises from which he moved to the new centre were so dilapidated that they had no usable lavatory, so staff and patients had no choice but to relieve themselves in the wash basin. In one particular even those old unsanitary days were, at least by Dr Sharma's account, an improvement on the standards of his earliest days in Liverpool. Then doctors would abandon patients in the waiting rooms while they went out for lunch or even tell them to come back on the following day because they wanted to spend the afternoon on the golf course. "If we did that today we would be struck off."  Twenty years ago, patients in inner cities "took everything a doctor said and accepted it without argument. Now they know their rights. That's very good. Very healthy." But the new independence does bring new problems.  Dr Sharma has never been sued. But in the modern litigious age he is conscious that "some people are encouraging legal action". He is in favour of the death of deference. But respect used to be one of medicine's attractions. "Now they must like the job."  Somehow, someone has to encourage more doctors liking the jobs in the inner cities. A comparison with a practice in a salubrious suburb shows how difficult that will be.