Two minutes to 10 in the House of Commons on a spring night in 1979. The vote on the second reading of the "right to buy" bill is about to take place. The minister of state in the Department of the Environment has almost finished his wind-up speech, attacking the opposition in general and me (its spokesman on the subject) in particular for opposing the sale of council houses to sitting tenants. In a moment of contrived drama he demands to know: "Will the Labour party, if ever again elected to government, repeal this legislation?" Tory backbenchers howl: "Answer." I rise in my place, and hoping I look more composed than I feel, either accept the challenge or (depending on which way you look at it) take the bait. My reply is one word. "Yes." I really believed it. The case against the subsidised sale of council houses was, then as now, overwhelming. There was no reason, either in economics or equity, why local councils - even then desperately short of capital - should sell off their greatest asset at bargain-basement prices. Everybody knew that, by reducing the nation's stock of rented property, the government would create a shortage of what is now called affordable housing. However, by judging the proposals on their practical merits, the Labour party had totally mistaken the significance of the policy.  We did not know at the time, although perhaps we should have guessed, that the sell-off was the beginning of the end for local authority housing - a process which climaxed, but did not culminate, this year in Birmingham when council tenants were told that, if they wanted repairs and renovation, they must vote for their estates to be transferred to the ownership of housing associations. The sale of council houses, Margaret Thatcher's first great privatisation, was the most blatant example of social engineering to be attempted by any political party in the second half of the 20th century. And it was a proclamation of the sort of government that the new Tories intended to be.  Selling council houses was supposed to promote an "ownership culture" and establish a climate of opinion in which the idea of individuals increasing their prosperity at the expense of the community became acceptable. Indeed, it announced that, from then on, collective action - society making provision for the needs of all its members - would take second place to personal initiatives. In its way, it was a brilliant example of a party seizing the agenda and insisting that the debate on the nation's future should be conducted on its own terms.  The damage that was done to families living in bed and breakfasts or trapped in unsaleable flats at the top of tower blocks was of no consequence. The Tory party was not in a mood to talk about anything as mundane as re-lets and subsidised rents. Council house sales were its oriflamme as it marched off to do battle with socialism and the state. And it now seems that New Labour sees the policy in exactly the same terms. When, last week, Downing Street discounted the possibility of abandoning or even amending "right to buy", it did not justify its attitude with statistics about new house building in the public or private rented sector. It merely stated its determination not to undermine "the opportunity agenda".  Council sales have become a symbol of the meritocracy. Yet the practical argument for a change of policy is overwhelming. We cannot solve this country's housing crisis if socially owned, rented houses are sold off for an average price of £40,000, while socially owned, rented houses can only be built if they receive a government subsidy of £65,000.  However, there are formidable difficulties in rolling back the frontiers of house privatisation. The case in favour is technical and complicated. The case against is emotional and simplistic. There is something inherently unattractive about politicians who own their houses - or sometimes, like me, own two - appearing to prevent other citizens from enjoying the same advantage. And that is exactly how a change of policy would be presented in the tabloids. The headlines would not be about the imbalance between 53,000 socially owned houses sold last year and 18,000 built, or the fact that the nation at large is paying the price for a few of its citizens enjoying a capital gain. There would be no mention of the 80,000 families in bed and breakfast accommodation. If Labour is to keep its housing promise, there are difficult days ahead.  Facing that difficulty is exactly what John Prescott is for. The responsibility for ending the housing crisis is his and, as deputy prime minister, he has the power to push the hard decisions through. If he fails or flinches, his political career will end in failure. For once, he needs to use some of that muscle which has been allowed to atrophy for far too long.  