All through her life Agatha Christie avoided the press, a secretive writer who hated interviews and never once agreed to appear on television. She saw no good reason why an inquisitive public should expect more from her than her books.  Born in Torquay in 1880, she lived until 1976, and died the best selling author in the English language, her sales still on the increase even now, standing at somewhere above four hundred million copies world-wide.  She came, as any reader of hers would guess, from a conventional middle class provincial background - that world or tea-parties, servants, tennis clubs, rectories, manor houses and public schools that dominates her books.  During the First World War she was a pharmacist in a local chemists, which gave her a working knowledge of poisons, but that hardly seems an explanation. All her life she had strong and powerful dreams, which Janet Morgan tentatively suggests may indicate the rich vein of fantasy in her character.  There were plenty of predecessors to her type of detective story writing - but after a few tentative beginnings, with fantasies and sentimental short stores, it was not long before she settled into this genre, for no apparent reason. She used to read her grandmother the crime stories out of the local paper, which may have aroused her interest. Certainly the morbid pre-occupations of her books seem to have had very little effect on the rest of her social life, for she was determined that her writing would always be of secondary importance to the living of her life, and the carrying out of her social wifely, and motherly duties.  She rapidly became highly professional in her approach mechanical in the working out of her plots and the manipulation of her characters, and dependent all her life on the money the books brought in.  The only really exciting event in her life was that astonishing disappearance, when half the Surrey countryside was scoured for her dead body after her car was found abandoned. The press were filled with reports of the hunt; some said it was a publicity-stunt (hardly likely in one who hated the press with such violence), others that she must suffer from amnesia, most that she had committed suicide.  The author gives a plausible account of a woman suffering a severe mental breakdown, partly amnesiac, due to her husband's announcement that he was leaving her for another woman. It was an episode that dogged the rest of her life.  The prolix 378 pages of this tome leave, not a stone unturned in the day to day doings of Mrs Christie; eighty-six years of bric-a-brac, people incidents houses, places, bills and interminable contract and copyright deals; and yet, oddly, the old lady herself has slipped away, vanished like Miss Marples.  Janet Morgan treats her subject with the kind of reverent academic respect that might be appropriate if Christie were a great simpler and not a much simpler phenomenon.  When the book needs is a dash of her own racy appeal, and a leap from fact into speculation about the nature of her astounding success, her readers, her world, and the attraction of her crime fantasies that have so little to do with real crime.  It is, however, an official biography, and at every page the heavy breath of a most protective family can be felt blowing upon Miss Morgan's neck as she writes, keeping her to a plethora of facts which sink the book like a tombstone.