With the Hutton Report due in weeks and Blair's future in the balance, it has never been more important to stay abreast of the news. Traditionally, the editor either instructs newsagents not to sell the paper to readers who score 10 or below in the annual quiz, or, if he's in a bad mood, persuades David Blunkett to intern them in Belmarsh. Not this year. He recognises that it's been all but impossible to keep up in 2003 and believes that anyone who has kept up deserves a medal. He is therefore delighted to announce that he has OBEs for the first 25 readers to get all the answers right. (They can be returned, at no cost to sender, within 10 days, if you are not fully satisfied with any aspect of local, national or international politics.)  The End of Tony Blair?    1 While Downing Street was compiling its dossier on Iraq's 'region-threatening' arsenal of weapons of mass destruction, which Blair aide asked Alastair Campbell, 'Alastair, what will be the headline in the Standard [London Evening Standard] on the day of publication?'    2 Which newspaper had the headline '45 Minutes From Attack' on the day of the dossier's publication?    3 Months after a war in which Saddam didn't fire chemical weapons in 45 minutes (or 45 hours or 45 days for that matter), who said he was confident the claim that Saddam had weapons of mass destruction ready to fire in 45 minutes 'was accurate and that the use made of it was entirely consistent with the original report'?    4 Why was this worrying?    5 Who admitted he knew that his government's claim that Saddam could launch weapons of mass destruction in 45 minutes referred only to battlefield shells, not long-range weapons that might spread destruction across the Middle East and even hit British bases in Cyprus as the press reported?    6 Why on earth didn't he try to correct what was an honest error on the press's part and stop the public being misled?    7 Tony Blair said that 'people know Europe needs America, and I believe America needs Europe too'. Who dismissed the idea and revealed the true balance of power in the 'special relationship' when he said that if Britain pulled out of the war 'there are workarounds' and the US had the forces to go into Iraq on its own?    8 Who said in July he had played no part in the naming of David Kelly?    9 According to Sir Kevin Tebbit, permanent secretary at the Ministry of Defence, who chaired the meeting where the decision to leak Dr Kelly's name was taken?    10 On 27 June, who told Alastair Campbell: 'You well know that it is a matter of principle for us not to reveal our sources'?    11 On 14 July, who privately told a Liberal Democrat member of the Commons Foreign Affairs Committee that Dr Kelly had been the source of 'my colleague Susan Watts, science editor of Newsnight '?    12 On 15 July, when he was asked by the chairman of the Foreign Affairs Committee what lessons he had learned, whose last words in public were: 'Never to talk to a journalist again, I think'?   The Death of Anti-Fascism    13 Which scientist showed he couldn't spot the difference between fascism and a fast-food restaurant when he told the Independent that to say the overthrow of a fascist regime justified war was the logical equivalent of saying that 'improvement in children's diet' justified blowing-up McDonald's?    14 Which scientist avoided that category error when he told the Guardian that 'Saddam destroyed our lives and not the lives of people sitting comfortably in England. What he means to us Iraqis is completely different from what he means to you. You can't begin to understand. I was eight years old when Saddam came to power, and now I am 43. I feel that my life has been stolen from me.'    15 Which impersonator of Tony Blair, acclaimed by critics and public alike for his national television shows which attacked Blair's subservience to Bush, said he was fighting the PM's 'moral imperialism'?    16 Which impersonator of Saddam Hussein, who was banned from Iraqi television, said of the death squad sent to assassinate him: 'Fortunately the guys were all arrested [by Kurdish freedom fighters]. They were found carrying a list. All our names were on it'?    17   They read good books, and quote,  but never learn a language other than the scream of rocket-burn.  Our straighter talk is drowned but ironclad:  elections, money, empire, oil and Dad.  Which poet wrote the above in 'Causa Belli' in January, as Her Majesty's armed forces prepared for battle?    18 In April, as Saddam fled from Baghdad, which poet brought up a cause of the conflict missed by his English colleague and wrote these prescient lines in his 'Runaway President'?   O runaway president  Listen just once in your life  If you have escaped the trap this time  I can assure you it will not be for long  Even this temporary safety is misleading  It is deadlier if you think about it  Fear will suck dry your red cells  And sooner rather than later  You will waste away  First you lose interest in your appearance  Then you will find no need to shave  And like exposed garbage you will start to stink    19 Which playwright, who wept buckets for the victims of a genocidal regime when Saddam was a de facto ally of Britain and America in the 1980s, wrote in 2003?   Dear President Bush,  I'm sure you'll be having a nice little tea party with your fellow war criminal, Tony Blair. Please wash the cucumber sandwiches down with a glass of blood, with my compliments.    20 Who said?   Where are these friends now? Regrettably, many are denouncing a war that would liberate Iraq. Like those [in power] who shunned us in the Eighties, some of our former friends find the martyrdom of the Iraqi people to be an irritant. They avert their eyes from the grisly truth of our suffering, while claiming concern at the human cost of war.    Business as usual     21 Who described Charles Kennedy's proposal to fund universities by taxing the rich rather than the young as 'completely unfair'?    22 Which Canadian tycoon said in his 1993 autobiography that he had ignored the 'deafening chorus of scandalised self-righteousness' from 'faddish groupies' and Ontario's 'yuppie-ridden lumpen proletariat' and sacked shop workers from a store he owned because 'a minority [had] since time immemorial, stolen more each year than the profit attributable to the shareholders'?    23  In 2003, which Canadian tycoon was the subject of an American Securities and Exchange Commission investigation into allegations that he used shareholders' money to fund £19 million of unauthorised executive payments, a monthly tab at Le Cirque 2000 restaurant in New York, an apartment in Park Avenue, New York, an 11-bedroom mansion in Kensington, a butler, a chef, a chauffeur, a maid and a vintage Rolls-Royce?    24 Who, after writing in 'Bought and Sold' that...   The ancestors would turn graves Those poor black folk that once were slaves would wonder How our souls were sold And check our strategies, The empire strikes back and waves Tamed warriors bow on parades When they have done what they've been told They get their OBEs  ... was offered an OBE?    25 After he had refused it on many grounds, not least that the Civil Service clearly hadn't read his poems, who then returned her MBE as a protest against the Government's treatment of asylum-seekers, the Iraq war and the behaviour of the House of Windsor (while conceding that the honours lists included 'little people - nurses, community activists, dinner ladies - for whom such recognition is priceless')?    26 Who then wrote to the press saying that she may return her OBE because 'the idea of a vainglorious parade [for the victorious England rugby team] is exclusive of the whole ethnic-minority population of this island and redolent of Anglo-Saxon imperialism'?      27 Is it socially acceptable for anyone other than 'little people' to accept an honour?    Tiebreaker     28 Who was Iain Duncan Smith?  Answers    1 Jonathan Powell  2 The Standard  3 Sir Richard Dearlove  4 He's the head of MI6  5 Geoff Hoon  6 Because 'my experience is that, generally speaking, newspapers are resistant to corrections'  7 Donald Rumsfeld  8 Tony Blair  9 Tony Blair  10 Richard Sambrook, director of BBC News  11 Andrew Gilligan, BBC defence correspondent  12 Dr David Kelly, BBC source  13 Professor Richard Dawkins, University of Oxford  14 Dr Mohamed Ahmed Salih, University of Baghdad  15 Rory Bremner  16 Mahir Hassan Rashid  17 Andrew Motion, Her Majesty's poet laureate  18 Salah Niazi, Iraqi poet, who can be read via www.opendemocracy.net  19 Harold Pinter  20 Barham Salih, Kurdish socialist leader  21 Tony Blair  22 Conrad Black  23 Conrad Black  24 Benjamin Zephaniah, poet  25 Yasmin Alibhai-Brown, pundit  26 Elsie Owusu, architect. (Only she was thinking nothing of the sort. The letter was a forgery)  27 No it is not  28  Leader of the British Conservative Party (2001-03)