Iain Duncan Smith is the ultimate argument in favour of the importance of personality in politics. He doesn't have one. Those who put him where he is today thought that didn't matter. They knew he was a small, obsessive, honest character entirely lacking in refulgence. They clothed him with an ideology they thought he embodied, and an integrity they then decided to regard as the be-all and end-all of leadership. But already he is finished. Even the rightwing press are saying so. Less than 18 months after choosing him, the Conservative party is deciding it made a mistake. The quiet man wrote his own epitaph. A year from now he will not, I think, be with us. Ideas do matter, and IDS has struggled to find some. But personality, in the modern age, matters more. It is via his face and other instinctive vibes that a leader registers what kind of human being he is, which is the prime concern of most voters who pay little attention to what is going on. To succeed from a standing start, without the credentials of experience, coming out of nowhere, a leader needs first to be seen as a fully paid up member of the human race.  This is why Tony Blair so quickly became a popular leader, and remains one, to an extent that Gordon Brown could probably never be. Blair is less defined by politics than most other practitioners of the game. He exudes normality. He is attentive but not, it seems, obsessive. In silly tests by opinion pollsters, his image is associated with drinks and cars that conform to the preferences of regular people. IDS is put down as a dry sherry man, a potation now associated, if at all, with golf club socials that are likely to be all-white and elderly. The leader's patent inability - an unalterable feature of the model - to fill the minimal leadership spec means that, as long as he is there, the Conservative party will continue to be doomed. And now it knows it.  What are the essential pieces of the leaderly personality? Four are surely crucial. A leader needs nerve: chutzpah in defence of risk is a key component. A leader needs menace: the instilling of a certain fear, growing out of the capacity for dangerous surprise. A leader needs wit: the ability to make swift repartee for television, never flummoxed, sometimes outrageous, usually winning. A leader needs steel: a quiet intransigence of purpose that everybody understands, without always being certain of the inner game he may be playing.  These talents have to serve a fifth requirement, which is, of course, some kind of vision. Blair had a vision that was easy to read and easier to justify. The past dictated it. There had to be reform. Blair's nerve, his threats, his platform facility, his back-room skills, and above all his steel, imposed a reform of the Labour party that had the history of 15 years' painful failure on its side.  That's what carried the party. But, among the wider electorate, the vision was less important than the personality promoting it. The voters wanted to be sure Labour wouldn't make another mess of the economy, but took only passing interest in clause 4. They wanted to be sure they were going to be led by a man they related to, a potentially big man who could sweep aside his enemies, speaking by natural instinct both from and to the world that they inhabited.    Duncan Smith, contrary to what some expected, did make a stumbling approach towards a vision. Even he, with his rightist pedigree, saw the need to reach beyond it. Something had to change in a party widely seen as nasty. The juvenilia and xenophobic fanaticism of the immediate past had to be replaced. Striking out in this direction, IDS made a partial escape from the atavistic demands of the Telegraph and the Mail, those two lead-weights forever holding the Tory party down in an antique, paralysed righteousness. Already he has tentatively moved it.  The trouble is that hardly anyone notices or cares. The ideas bit has just begun to shift, but the personality bit - the agent of belief, the conduit to public interest - is intractable. Under present management it will always be so. However, the leader has performed a service. The conditions are now different from 18 months ago, when IDS was chosen by the rank and file. He has led Conservatism to the edge of the precipice where it can finally see rock bottom. But he has also paved the way for somebody not like him. Having abandoned the hardline agenda, he has released the party from the cul de sac that led it inexorably, the last two times, towards the dead end of the old right.  Groping for a centrist position, in other words, it is free to consider the kind of personality that might make a leader. It can look for someone whose style, and scale, and nerve, and confidence, and swift wit in handling Tony Blair might make it feel good about itself, inject a little self-belief, disturb the multiple complacencies that cross-cut with anxious frenzy to define the mental state of the government: and might put some energy behind an effort to construct the Tory version of public service improvement which is the main task of modern British politics.  The front-runner for this role appears to be Michael Portillo. He looks like the obvious replacement, by age and experience. He was a fine minister and remains a man of large thoughts. He qualifies under the headings of risk and nerve and possibly menace. But he is not steely. His most recent discussion of his future, with David Frost, revealed a furrowed neurotic who can't make up his mind. Like David Davis, the light weight chancer, Portillo would offer no absolute guarantee that the party might not be looking for yet another new leader before very long.  The man for whom IDS's trajectory - political shift and personality wipe-out alike - prepares the way is, in truth, Kenneth Clarke. For a demoralised party, Clarke is the only man who checks out all the boxes. His problem is Europe, where he goes against the majority Tory grain. But IDS did Clarke a special favour by not only moving things centrewards but decreeing that Europe was no longer to be high on the party agenda. Though there is a party line, everyone could say what they wanted. Putting Europe in its place, IDS made Clarke, the unfashionable europhile, more credible as his replacement  Europe obviously remains an issue, though if Blair renounced the referendum it would be irrelevant. I believe, such is the depth of justified gloom and panic among active Tories, that Clarke's personal qualities - his size, his humanity, his bullish noise, his capacity for swift and lethal shafting of the other side - are now ready to be seen as more important than the inconvenience of his euro opinions. In place of the quiet dry stick that can barely stir a pile of autumn leaves, the Tories have in their armoury a flaming broadsword. They need it for their survival. One way or another, I think that is what they will in due course produce to fight the next election.  