Our ministers for asylum, who are more or less against it, picture themselves as victims. Every time David Blunkett or his deputy, Beverley Hughes, talks, you hear the voice of wounded, gallant democrats, acting out the popular will in the teeth of legal nit-pickers, knee-jerk liberals and other troublemakers who reject the vast scale of the problem ministers face. Actually, Blunkett and Hughes are not victims but aggressors. So hell-bent is the Home Office on tying down every loose asylum seeker that it has suddenly decided to attack not just these wretched of the earth but the constitutional rules on which our system - our democracy, not ministers' - is supposed to rest. Three days remain to stop this convoluted, silent scandal happening. Today the Commons takes its last look at Blunkett's nationality, immigration and asylum bill. The house is unlikely to distinguish itself. It failed to do so at any previous stage of the bill's passage, routinely voting through, as is its habit, the empowering of the strong and enfeebling of the weak which the Blairite Commons, with its brain-dead majority, can be relied on to deliver. Even this torpid body, however, might just be struck by what it is now being asked to rubber-stamp.  The item emerged only last week, towards the end of transit through the Lords. The government turned out to want a safety net for its own incompetence, and drafted a catch-all clause giving it the power to amend by simple ministerial order, otherwise known as statutory instrument, anything in the bill that later proved unsatisfactory to the ministers whose creation it is. The law will now legislate for illegality, at the convenience of those who wrote it and might want to break it. This may seem surreal, but in fact is symbolic of the ground-breaking arrogance that all Blair's ministers - these pitiable victims of events that conspire against them - bring to their dealings with parliament.  The bill is already big with ministerial power. It writes new rules for the meaning of nationality. It prescribes a new regime for accommodation centres, especially in relation to children. It curbs the right of appeal against decisions by ministers and bureaucrats to detain and deport. It reverses the burden of proof on asylum seekers to show that they are not criminals. It raises several challenges to the sincerity of British adherence to the European convention on human rights.  One can't deny that some of this is necessary, especially the need to speed the judicial process and make the whole operation of asylum seeking more efficient. But the bill contains startling novelties barely debated anywhere: for example, a power for the home secretary by executive fiat to deprive of British citizenship even someone who has it by birth here. This seems to be advanced as a way of depriving an undesirable of the right of abode in Britain. As far as I can see, it means, as written, that Blunkett's subjective judgment that my presence, or anyone else's, was prejudicial to the vital interests of the UK would be enough to have me removed. Am I sensible to be writing this piece?  The overshadowing threat, however, is greater still. The bill was going through parliament for seven months. This was preceded by further months of deliberation inside government. Every big hypothesis, one might have thought, would have been considered. Besides, normally a statute is a statute, warts and all. Yet last week, in the final stage of Lords passage, Blunkett panicked. Just in case he hadn't thought of everything, he demanded power, without due legislative process, to think again if some detail of the asylum and/or immigration and/or nationality law turned out not to work out quite as he expected. This is the so-called Henry VIII clause, suitably named after our most unconstitutional monarch. It registers a naked usurpation of parliamentary power.  Such is the tyranny of the unfailing Blairite majority. But, in parallel, there comes the surrealism. Ministers don't defend the clause on grounds of precedent, though there are one or two of these, but because the bill has been amended so often and so late that the Home Office isn't confident it can figure out what all these changes might mean in practice. The minister, Lord Filkin, was unashamed to make this case despite the glaring, ridiculous, embarrassing fact that just about every amendment in question was the government's. "Events in the wider world are moving fast," he sagely said. The government doesn't know what it is doing, so needs the power to override its errors. Immigration and asylum evidently require a kind of perpetual legislating machine, which Blunkett has now decided to produce without benefit of parliamentary intervention.   Nor, it seems, will this be confined to the present bill. Blunkett is taking the power to do "that which he thinks is necessary" in connection with anything to do with nationality, asylum or immigration. The wording is unguarded; the defence of it, by Filkin, as disingenuous as that of any servile deputy who can't credit the suspicion that his boss might contemplate abusing the power he confers upon himself or acting ultra vires. "The government have no intention of so doing," Filkin purred. Oh yeah? Having acquired the vires, how can Blunkett go ultra?  Between now and Thursday, when the present session of parliament ends, offers the only chance to stop this portmanteau spare power, an executive prop to cover all eventualities, from coming into being. To construct such an emergency weapon, just in case the most vulnerable people in this country might happen to find a way round the declared asylum law, is a disproportionate response to reality. Since it was introduced in the Lords, the Lords have the right to insist on its removal - as they voted to do last week by 171 to 116 - without being charged with wrecking the whole bill. When it comes back for the last time, Liberal Democrat peers, the creative defenders of libertarian precision throughout this debate, will be solid. Can one hope the Tories will refrain from dithering? But there's a larger issue. Once again Labour politicians have proved unprincipled and uninterested in standing up to their power-hungry ministers. There are a few exceptions, especially those sitting on the joint committee on human rights, who did admirable work on the complex measure.  Otherwise, we're left with questions about the modern meaning of election. One is about voters. As Earl Russell said, would the government dare introduce a measure of this kind if it were likely to affect not Albanians but people whose votes they wanted? There's a reverse question, about politicians. Does election itself create only ciphers? Must MPs be judged formally incapable of the scrutiny and tenacity the Lords have shown in defence of a principle that lies far above party? Anyway, if only half the country now thinks it worth voting, what happens to the claim that legitimacy always and everywhere rests solely with the elected House of Commons?  · 