If the public, as Lord Justice Scott Baker declared this week, really does have "concerns" about the death of Princess Diana, it has a funny way of showing it. For all the "groundless suspicion" which, according to the judge, still exists in minds of many people, scarcely any of these haunted individuals turned up in court 73 at the Royal Courts of Justice this week, to have their anxieties officially allayed. To avoid disappointment, the courts had even laid on a special marquee, with a screen and rows of chairs. In the event, a two-man tent from Millets would have accommodated the spillover, with room to spare.Assuming it is not the fear that Prince Philip might demand their execution that keeps everyone away, it seems that Diana's death has become one of those odd subjects, like the likelihood of a November election, that is of consuming fascination to the media, even as it evokes, among the bulk of civilians, only a fathomless indifference. Where, the papers ask, did Henri Paul go in those crucial eight minutes? If we don't know now, after two official inquiries, we may well have to live with that mystery. Though of course we hope M Paul did not - as he certainly could have - use these missing minutes to ring the Duke of Edinburgh with the news that he was already pissed and about to get in the car.Meanwhile, as the Mail asked about a picture of Diana in a lift, "What did her smile signify?" That Diana liked going in lifts? Or did she really, as the Daily Mirror avers, have "not a care in the world"? If the inquest finds that this was indeed the case, Tina Brown will certainly want to go back to her authoritative Diana Chronicles and adjust at least one word in her opening tour de force, an extended piece of Ritz hotel realite ("Diana was at the end of a chaotic night out, and her mood was sour"). And what about the surpassingly awful "dis-moi oui" ring? Was it a straightforward taste accident on the part of her lover, or, as some sources have hinted, a sinister plot by MI6 to make Dodi and Diana look vulgar?In reality, after three days of evidence (the jurors rested on the fourth, prior to next week's fact-finding trip to Paris) - the one, compelling mystery is that, following both a French inquiry and a British one, Mohamed Al Fayed should have prevailed on the authorities to recruit a judge, 12 jurors and an army of 30 lawyers, so they could all spend another six months, and an estimated &pound;10m, weighing up what Lord Justice Scott Baker likes to call the "building blocks for the conspiracy to murder theory".One important block, raised on day one, was whether Diana was pregnant. Put forward by Mr Fayed, the claim for pregnancy was apparently supported in the past. with the evidence consisting of a personal phone call to Mr Fayed, and a Sunday People picture of the Princess forgetting to hold her tummy in. Producing it for the court, the judge described as "famous" (in what is presumably an unconscious echo of Dylan's cadences) this "photograph of Diana in a leopard print swimsuit", before pointing out that it was taken before her relationship with al Fayed's son had begun. Thus, "her physique" - as he delicately put it, could have nothing to do with Dodi.None the less, the judge reassured the court that this seeming impossibility would be soberly investigated - "the question of whether Diana was pregnant at the time of her death is one that will be explored". So, too, will be the question of her embalming - a process held by Mr Fayed to be part of a conspiracy to conceal the secret pregnancy. So will the question of Diana's engagement to Dodi Fayed, which is also alleged by Mr Fayed, though, one gathers, by none of Diana's close friends.Now that they see the enormous consideration being extended to Mr Fayed and his theories about the murderous nature of Prince Philip, many amateur investigators must wish that they, too, had put some of their more ambitious conjectures before the court. Is there no plan, for example, to examine the popular theory that Diana planned to stage her own death, in order to withdraw from public life? It can hardly be more preposterous than allegations made by the late princess herself, according to the judge, when she told an astonished lawyer that the queen was about to abdicate, while she and Camilla were both to be "put aside". Lord Justice Scott Baker revealed that Lord Mishcon said that Diana told him that Camilla was not really Charles's lover, but a "decoy" for his real favourite, the nanny Tiggy Legge-Bourke. "She had also," the judge went on to say, "been told that Miss Legge-Bourke had been operated on for an abortion and that she (HRH) would shortly be in receipt of a certificate."It is tempting, once you're in the conspiratorial frame of mind, to see the judge's patient rehearsal of this dreadful stuff as, if not actually subversive, his meaning way of emphasising the abject, tabloid-serving agenda of this inquest. Hopefully, Lord Justice Scott Baker can only bear to talk about Dodi's girlfriend, Kelly, and Diana's famous leopard-print bathers - dishing out the original snap, with the rest of the court papers, for closer inspection by the masses - because he believes that if this final Diana fest is what it takes to once and for all satisfy Mr Fayed, then it is his duty, as the fourth coroner on the case, to get the job done.This might also explain the absurd court commentary that accompanies every single frame of the videos from the Ritz hotel. "The Princess of Wales is carrying Dodi Al Fayed's cigar box", a policeman said, presumably in case someone were subsequently to allege it was a bomb, or a baby's coffin. "Trevor Rees-Jones is looking at his phone and notebook." Later, as Henri Paul goes through a revolving door, "you will see him holding his cigarillo box in his hand".If Mr Fayed refuses to withdraw his accusations without having his months in court, then maybe we really do have to hear, again, about the embalming and the ring, about Paul Burrell's fears and Prince Philip's letters - not to mention the hitherto unsuspected role of cigar boxes and abortion certificates in the life of our favourite princess. Then again, is Mr Fayed remotely likely to retreat, if Prince Philip turns out, on the balance of probabilities, not to be a ruthless killer? You can't help thinking that it might have simpler, and definitely cheaper, if our secret services had just added him to the hit list.