Twenty-five years ago, almost to the day, Jim Callaghan's government was defeated in a vote of confidence. The enforced general election that followed opened the way for the injustices and inequalities that we now call Thatcherism. In one sense, the anniversary is unimportant. The idea that there are moments in history when the world suddenly turns upside down is a romantic conceit. If the shot across the bridge at Concord had not echoed round the world in 1775, the American colonists would still have cried freedom. And it was Germany's long-held imperial pretensions, not the assassination at Sarajevo, that caused the first world war. But that late March evening back in 1979 at least symbolises the end of one era and the beginning of another. Now, we are told, it need never have happened.  Labour whips had spent the previous week struggling to construct a House of Commons majority. I was deputed to convince two working-class Ulster Unionist MPs that Northern Ireland's interests would best be served by the government's survival. The mission was accomplished. But two other Ulster men, who normally supported Callaghan, defected for reasons that were lost in the mist of Celtic obscurity. As the division approached, it became clear that we were still one vote short. The agony of impending defeat was increased by the fact that we knew who that one vote was.  Sir Alfred "Doc" Broughton, the 77-year-old MP for Batley and Morley, was mortally ill. Had he been brought to the Commons by ambulance and kept "in the precincts" while the division took place, he could have been "nodded through" the lobby and his vote recorded. But the journey might have killed him. I was unhesitatingly in favour of taking the risk. So - much to his credit - was he. His courage was, however, confounded by the compassion of the Labour leadership.  We now discover that Walter Harrison, deputy government chief whip, approached Bernard Wetherill, his opposition counterpart, with the demand that the sick man be "paired". On radio last week, both men discussed what followed. The account of their negotiations will, to say the least, surprise those Labour MPs who lost their seats in the 1979 general election.  Wetherill first insisted that "pairs" were never provided for votes of confidence. The government, if it wanted to survive, must marshal all its forces. Harrison replied that the refusal was a breach of faith. Anxious to defend his honour, Wetherill offered to sit out the division himself - simultaneously matching Broughton's absence and destroying his own career.   Touched by the act of chivalry, Harrison told him that he could not accept such a sacrifice. Wetherill voted. The Labour government lost, and Margaret Thatcher became prime minister.  Listening to the radio discussion, I got the distinct impression that the two men expected their audience to be impressed. Wetherill was undoubtedly justified in his rejoicing. He won. But Harrison had elevated his definition of gentlemanly conduct above the interests of the whole Labour party. His duty was to defeat the vote of confidence, not behave like a boy scout.  Harrison is entitled to argue that the prime minister could have absolved him from the responsibility of choosing between conscience and duty. Enoch Powell had offered to lead all his Unionist friends into the government lobby in payment for the promise that a gas pipeline would be laid between Northern Ireland and mainland Britain. Jim Callaghan rightly refused to put the government up for auction. He went down on a point of principle. But a question still hangs over both men's decision. Did they matter anyway?  Had either or both of them behaved differently - and the election been postponed until the autumn - would the rancid tide of Thatcherism have been held back? During the last week of the election campaign, Callaghan himself said that the country's mood had turned and that Labour's day was done. Harrison can say, in his own defence, that - even if the vote of censure had been lost - the inevitable would have only been postponed.  Two great planks in Labour's policy platform had been destroyed. After the "winter of discontent", the trade unions no longer seemed an unequivocal force for good. And, by arguing in favour of the IMF agreement, we had all added to the calumny that high levels of public expenditure are the root of all evil. Perhaps there was an even deeper reason for Labour's rejection.  Britain had lost confidence in collective and co-operative effort and begun to believe that individualism was the secret of success. Even if we had not held the election at a time of Mrs Thatcher's choice, we might have lost. But I still wish we had been given the chance to find out.