Perhaps I have spent too much time recently reviewing books about British espionage operations during the second world war. Whatever the reason, I cannot help speculating about the possibility that Iain Duncan Smith has been "planted" on the Tories by the forces of reason and radicalism and instructed to make sure the Conservative party never forms a government again. Most of the British agents captured in occupied France were victims of over-confidence - aces of sabotage so blatant that their true identities became obvious. How else is it possible to explain the appointment of Barry Legg as the chief executive of the Conservative party? Mr Legg is a comparatively young man who became very rich very quickly. There is nothing to complain about in that. Indeed, we should be impressed that, even as he was acquiring his sudden wealth, he always made time for public service. Councillor Legg was chief whip of the Conservative group, which controlled Westminster local government under the leadership of Dame Shirley Porter. Unfortunately, Dame Shirley will not be a guest at the party to celebrate his appointment as Duncan Smith's right-hand man. She is in Israel, a fugitive from the district auditor, who requires her to pay a surcharge of £26.5m as the penalty for attempting to secure re-election by selling council houses to potential Tory voters.  It would be quite wrong to find the Tories' new chief executive guilty by association with the perpetrators of what Lord Bingham, while he dismissed their appeal against the surcharge, described as "a deliberate, blatant and dishonest use of public power" - especially so since the district auditor absolved Legg of wilful misconduct. But he is entitled to more than a footnote in the history of the squalid affair. "I find as a fact," wrote the district auditor in his report, "that councillor Legg knew it was wrong for the council to exercise its powers in order to secure an increase in the number of likely Conservative votes in marginal wards. In such circumstances, a member has a duty to speak up."  Is it possible that Duncan Smith - mesmerised by ex-councillor Legg's Euroscepticism - had forgotten his new colleague's role in the homes-for-votes scandal? Or does the new Tory leader regard turning a blind eye as an acceptable response to the discovery of politically advantageous wrongdoing? And - public morality aside - can the Tory leader really imagine that the other parties will forget the position Legg occupied when Dame Shirley organised the biggest political gerrymander in British history? Hundreds of council tenants were left in damp and decaying tenements because the houses that were rightfully theirs were allocated to Tory sympathisers. Believe me, Legg's tenure as chief whip on the Westminster city council will be mentioned during the next general election campaign.  The Shirley Porter inheritance - hanging round Legg's neck like a slime-covered millstone - will hugely prejudice the Tory party's reputation with the general public. But the beauty of his appointment - at least from my point of view - is that he will also cause mayhem within what is left of the Tory party. I have no idea whether or not he was recruited in a way that violates the Tories' constitution. And I have no doubt Duncan Smith's associates are right to describe Theresa May - Legg's principal critic - as an "airhead". But, all that said, what benefit does Duncan Smith believe he derives from surrounding himself with UK Independence party sympathisers, who made life hell for John Major during the dying days of the last Tory government?  Duncan Smith, who made his name by undermining his leader, relies on the cynical message of John Harrington's epigram, "Treason doth never prosper: what's the reason? For if it prosper none dare call it treason." But in modern politics - believe it or not - men and women retain a residual loyalty to old heroes. The brightest and best of the modern Tory party did not look upon Major with unqualified awe or admiration. They recalled that he was the Thatcherite leadership candidate whose mission was to save her party from One Nation Conservatism. But they still deeply resent the way a handful of fanatical anti-Europeans assiduously undermined him and brought down his government. Now, thanks to Duncan Smith, those rebels occupy more and more power within the party. It is as though, after 1979, Michael Foot had annointed the trade unionists who refused to bury the Liverpool dead.  Duncan Smith was right, last Thursday, when he told the Today programme that the political debate is not about the state of the Tory party. But that is only because its prospects have already been written off. Legg's appointment merely confirms that all Duncan Smith now hopes for is the loyalty of the section of his party that exists outside mainstream British politics.