Is it possible that 80% of the British population want the 2012 Olympic Games to be held in London? My scepticism about that particular finding is as much the result of my faith in the common sense of this happy breed as the consequence of my contempt for much of what goes on in the modern Olympiad. It is, at least for me, impossible to argue that the importance of snowboarding and figure skating is not winning but taking part. And, these days, the main objective of even the genuinely athletic events is not so much running fast and jumping high as making money. If there was a modern Roger Bannister who thought that qualifying as a doctor was his most important task, but still broke and held world records, I might be tempted to join the demand for a British bid. As things stand, I do not care which city hosts the international festival of exploitation.  Nor should the British public - whatever their view on the character-building qualities of beach volleyball. For, wherever the games are held, rank-and-file sports enthusiasts will be left outside the stadium. Most of the seats will be reserved for dubious VIPs' "corporate hospitality" or sold by travel agents who market expensive package deals of flights, hotels and restaurants with a quick visit to the women's 200m final thrown in.  For the rest of us, watching the games on television in our living rooms, it does not matter whether the tracks and fields are in London, Rome, Geneva or Reykjavik. The outstanding question is, are we prepared to pay between £2bn and £5bn for the privilege of broadcasting the Olympics from London?  Officially, the government has still to come off the Olympic fence, but it is possible to judge which way it is wobbling by the figure it chooses to accept as the full cost. The Ove Arap estimate of £2bn, dismissed a month or so ago as far too low, is back in favour. So we must assume that, at the moment, Tony Blair wants the British bid to go ahead.  One billion will be subscribed by the lottery and what is mysteriously called "other non-governmental sources" and Ken Livingstone has agreed that the other billion can be raised by a precept on the London council tax. Spread over 10 years, the addition to the tax bill will, it is hoped, be hardly noticed, quickly forgotten and barely resented. Manchester helped to pay for the Commonwealth Games and Sheffield accepted part of the International Student Games bill. According to David Blunkett, council leader at the time, Sheffield's price included the defeat of the Labour party in the local elections.   This year the government sees bidding for the Olympics as a way of avoiding potential political damage. The International Olympic Committee will make its decision in July 2005 - two months after, or three months before, the most likely dates for the next general election. How much better to face the electorate after at least attempting to make Britain the centre of the sporting universe than risk the accusation that New Labour lacks the confidence or the courage to do what Los Angeles, Munich and Sydney have done? From out of the past comes the echo of John Prescott urging the cabinet to carry on the development of the dome. "If we can't do this, we can't do anything."  The dome comparison is painfully apposite - right down to the collateral argument that the real object of the Olympic exercise is to redevelop neglected parts of London. And, if the government does bid for the 2012 Olympics, the progress of that second attempt to demonstrate its natural exuberance is likely to be no more successful than the first. Costs will escalate when it is too late to pull out. Private backers will lose their nerve, so the Treasury will have to choose between subsidy and national humiliation. An idea that was conceived as proof that Britain is a "can do" society will turn into the opportunity for critics to attack a "can't do" government.  While pondering the objective merits of an Olympic bid, the government thought it right to consult not one but three focus groups. All of them were unanimous in the belief that the government should go ahead, but none of them was sure why. Focus groups are "snapshots" - glimpses of a moment which do not even claim to remain accurate pictures when it passes.  Nor do they aspire to present their participants with complicated questions such as, "Do you find something pathetic about a nation feeling that it has to demonstrate its vitality?" But the answer to that question must be "yes". It is countries in decline - see Edward Gibbon - that invent proof of their youth and vigour. Mature democracies get on with the everyday business of being peaceful, progressive and prosperous. Britain should have enough self-confidence to do the same.