Think of what follows as a Christmas codicil to the splendid and well-deserved assault on columnists which was published in last Tuesday's Guardian. Charitably, Martin Kettle chose not to expose all the weaknesses of the trade. To the sins of ignorance and sloth, he might well have added pomposity - a failing which has been recently displayed in the almost universal complaint that the Liberal leader lacks gravitas. Charles Kennedy has attracted that indictment by performing as temporary chairman of Have I Got News for You? - a task which he discharged with commendable elan. His critics ought to realise that it is his essentially unstatesmanlike persona which makes him popular with the public. His party prospers in the opinion polls because no one could possibly imagine him as a minister - a class of person which is held in universal contempt.  Other politicians could make themselves equally appealing by also insinuating themselves into conventionally unsuitable TV and radio shows. A quick glance at the Radio Times confirms that there are programmes which could easily accommodate everyone who has ever sat on either the government or opposition frontbench.  Beginning with a sure-fire winner, the BBC could broadcast a special edition of Changing Rooms in which Gordon Brown described how he will redecorate 10 Downing Street as soon as he moves in. Tony Blair fronting Neighbours From Hell would then splendidly round off an evening of "lifestyle" viewing. To preserve party balance it would be necessary, the next day, for Theresa May to star in Have You Remembered What Not to Wear? followed by Michael Portillo in After They Were Famous. Unfortunately, none of the shadow cabinet would be eligible for an appearance in Friends or Band of Brothers.  Alan Milburn might be regarded as a natural for Casualty. But that slot should be reserved for Peter Mandelson, the only secretary of state in history to become one twice in a single session. No doubt he thinks of himself as ideally suited to You've Been Framed. Milburn should host The National Lottery. Winners would be awarded a place in a foundation hospital, while the losers would be sent to wait for a bed in an understaffed adaptation of a poor law workhouse.  Some of the possible programmes may not be regarded as suitable for transmission before the 9pm watershed. Young and impressionable minds should not, for example, be exposed to Dennis Skinner in The Life of Mammals or Stephen Byers making a brief appearance in They Think It's All Over. It might well be that the broadcasting commission refused to allow Paul "It's the Way I Tell 'Em" Boatang to appear in his Max Miller-style suits and perform his well-known imitation of that great comedian in Stars in Their Eyes. But, on the evidence of recent Newsnight appearances, he would be an ideal subject for Red Mist, "recalling how people react when they are pushed to breaking point."  Gerald Kaufman already qualifies for membership of one of the teams in The Generation Game. If he stands for re-election again, he may justify an appearance on Antiques Roadshow. It could be followed by John Prescott in Scrapheap Challenge, though I would enjoy his contribution to The Adventure of English. Prescott certainly deserves a supporting role in a special transport department edition of Bitter Inheritance, starring Alistair Darling. A discussion between John Reid and Andrew Smith in Robot Wars could make an ideal end to the evening's viewing.  We should not discount the possibility of radio providing politicians with the lift-off they so desperately need. Who could fail to be impressed by Clare Short in the Moral Maze - arguing for and against the propositions simultaneously - or Charles Clarke, in The Learning Curve, explaining why he condemns the retention of secondary selection in Kent but is prepared for it to continue prejudicing the prospects of that county's children.  Finding a vehicle in which the leader of the opposition could be seen to best advantage is not an easy task. Obviously, he would be hopeless in The Premiership on Saturday - or, for that matter, any other day of the week. I have no doubt for which programme you, cynical readers, expect me to nominate him. You are wrong. I would no more suggest that Iain Duncan Smith appears on The Weakest Link than I would propose the leader of the Commons for Ready, Steady, Cook. Robin may well be both of those things, but we columnists have to avoid anything which is obvious and banal. Duncan Smith's natural home is I'm Sorry I Haven't a Clue.  Merry Christmas