Tony Blair's willingness to "pay the blood price" that the special relationship with America requires goes down in history alongside Ted Heath's promise to "cut prices at a stroke" and Jim Callaghan's incredulous question: "Crisis. What crisis?" All are united by the fact that each of the infamous phrases was an intentional misquotation. But do not expect an angry Downing Street statement insisting that Tony Blair never used, nor could have used, such infelicitous language. For the notion, inherent in that ugly expression, is a distorted reflection of the prime minister's passion for solidarity with the US. That is why the fraudulent attribution was so clever and so damaging. Heath and Callaghan were traduced in the same way. The fabrication of the prices promise - probably intended at the time to make the Tory leader sound "dynamic" - was justified with the explanation that a Conservative research document predicted a rapid reduction in the inflation rate. The fabrication of the Labour prime minister's crisis question - certainly meant to damage him and his government - was defended with the excuse that, on return from a meeting with the president of France, he had suggested that a couple of days spent discussing ways to avoid nuclear annihilation put the breakdown of refuse collection into perspective. The newspapers had, they insisted, done no more than compress long statements into a suitable size for front-page headlines.  In Tony Blair's case, the three-card trick was played rather differently. Michael Cockerell, interviewing the prime minister for a television "special", used the offending and offensive phrase in a question. Did standing shoulder to shoulder with America mean that "the blood price" had to be paid? The prime minister followed a reflex "yes" with the explanation that loyalty required "commitment" as well as "support and sympathy" - a sensible enough answer in a reasonable world. It is difficult, even with three days hindsight, to imagine what better reply he might have given. "I would not put it quite like that myself"? Pusillanimous. "Let us hope it will not come to that"? Evasive. "I pray that not a single British life will be lost"? Sanctimonious and transparently disingenuous. Blair was trapped.  That is not to say that the trap was intentionally laid. I accuse Michael Cockerell of neither personal animus towards the prime minister nor political prejudice against the government. But there is still something fishy about the entire episode. "Blood price" is an idea that I associate with Sioux and Comanches as they appeared in Hollywood westerns in the days when native Americans were called Red Indians. It is not a word that is   likely to spring to a sophisticated television interviewer's mind. Then the prime minister's apparent acceptance of Cockerell's savage language was reported in selected newspapers two days before the broadcast.  I do not suggest that Tony Blair was the victim of a conspiracy. He suffered from what the BBC will regard as high quality marketing. Current affairs producers are as anxious to make the news as to report it. Reading about their programme in the papers is a mark of success. And if the confession or dramatic comment is made public before the broadcast, the notoriety helps to improve viewing figures. I guarantee that there will be BBC ratings fanatics who judge that the blood price story hit the jackpot.  There are two lessons to be learned from the episode. The first is that television programmes - no matter how lofty their format and exalted their proclaimed purpose - are always looking for sensation. Tony Blair's balanced view on what he sees as the possible need to take military action against Iraq is, in televi sion terms, far less attractive than a gaffe, a slip of the tongue or, in this case, the endorsement of an extravagant expression.  Yet paradoxically the trivialisation - for that is what the search for sensation usually amounts to - is sometimes justified. If we do join with America in the invasion of Iraq, British blood will be spilt. Politicians who positively want a war - a category in which I do not include Tony Blair - may not like that stark description of reality, but it is the duty of journalists to expose gory truth.  There are many ways in which to describe President Bush's Middle East adventure - all of them, because of the heart-stopping implications of its consequences, likely to be polarised and prejudiced. The president himself calls it an attempt to deprive the world's worst leader of the world's worst weapons. Who could possibly object to that? We hear nothing from him about the body bags, crippled veterans or the death and destruction that will be suffered by thousands of innocent Iraqis. If we send troops to the Gulf, some of the bodies in bags will be British. That may be a price we have to pay. But it is right to face up to the hard consequences of "commitment". The prime minister was conned. But it was a fair cop.