I blame the Tory party. The Conservatives have become so hopelessly irrelevant that the old inhibitions on disagreement and dissent no longer apply. No one in government cares if the opposition asks, "If they cannot agree among themselves, how can they hope to run the country?" For everybody knows that the job is not going to be offered to Iain Duncan Smith. There is no incentive to avoid trouble. No matter how hard the boat is rocked, it is not going to sink. Six months of open warfare between the trade unions and the Labour party will not change the electoral history of Britain. There may even be young advisers in Downing Street who tell the prime minister that the more he dismisses the demands of organised labour (representing the working class) the greater will become the prospects of a permanent Blairite hegemony. We can be sure that sentiment will not bind him to the trade unions and we know that in terms of labour market policy he has more in common with Silvio Berlusconi than John Monks.  So he will let the public sector disputes fester on, willing to see the breach widened before the wounds are healed by some sort of conciliation. But the trade unions have nothing to gain from the events of the last few months - threats of reduced subscriptions, strikes in public service industries and wild speeches from general secretaries who are not even Labour party members - becoming the pattern for the rest of the year and beyond. The prospect of New Labour creating the sort of society that they want to see depends on them treading softly and maximising their influence rather than intensifying their protests.  No doubt most of their claims are justified. At a moment when the country stands poised on the brink of the European single currency, it is difficult to argue that British workers should accept every sort of integration except the harmonisation of industrial relations law. And, principles aside, an improvement in public sector pay is a practical necessity if the long-promised reform of public services is to evolve from rhetoric to reality.  But none of the long-term items on the trade unions' agenda will be achieved by shock tactics. Social justice depends on a return to social democracy. An increasingly dissatisfied rank and file will continue to demand a change of course. Only the trade unions, working from inside the party, have the strength to bring it about.  It was not Labour's constituency parties, passionately though they felt on the subject, that persuaded David Blunkett to replace the odious asylum seekers' voucher scheme with cash subsistence payments. It was the Transport and General Workers Union. Other changes have to be made in the same way.   That is not easy for a union in which the general secretary owes his or her allegiance to one of the no-hope organisations on the wilder shores of politics and supports palpably silly resolutions that force ministers to resign their membership of the union. So the unions should work with the grain of the party. We are at the point in Labour's history where they have to make the choice that they once accused party activists of ducking - emotionally satisfying but essentially impotent gestures or real, but limited, influence. The alternatives they choose may well determine the future of radical politics in this country.  I have argued in this column that a permanent separation, or even a formal divorce, from Labour might give the trade unions a freedom of action that they could use to their members' advantage. Some trade unions (out of frustration) and some newspapers (out of malice) now argue for that course.  For the party the result would be ideological disaster, compounding the political errors the trade unions made in the late 1990s. By believing that all that mattered was a leader who could guarantee victory, they got the party into the New Labour mess. Now they have a duty to get the party out of it. The combined block vote could have prevented Tony Blair from emasculating the party conference and ignoring the men and women who would have argued for real Labour policies. They abdicated and must now make amends.  There was method in his marginalisation. Voices that would have been raised against the part-privatisation of the public services, the gradual return to selective secondary education and the imposition of unwanted and unrepresentative parliamentary candidates, have been stilled. The objections to new Thatcherism are as strong as they ever were. But the new constitution does not allow them to be expressed by rank-and-file party members. The trade unions have an obligation to do the job for them.  A summer of discontent will achieve nothing. It will take years of methodical and often tedious argument to set Labour back on the long and winding road to socialism. The unions should pay their subscriptions, vote their full strength and save the party they created.