All the newspaper metaphors had the sort of literary associations that can be recognised by people who have not read many books. First he was TS Eliot's mystery cat - no more than an excuse to write that whenever the prime minister needs helping out of a jam, in the manner of Macavity, Gordon Brown's not there. Then he was said to be like the dog that aroused Sherlock Holmes' interest and suspicion because it did not bark. Comparisons with Shergar, the disappearing thoroughbred, were only prevented by the near certainty that, when the next big Labour party leadership race is run, the chancellor of the exchequer will win at a canter. Attempts to discover if he was asked to speak up for Tony Blair during the bizarre debate about the proper treatment of the Queen Mother's corpse were dismissed with the weary implication that there was no point in Downing Street issuing an invitation which was certain to be refused. And there is no doubt that Brown's regular detractors spread the word that, if the Treasury is not directly involved in a fiasco, there is no hope of the chancellor coming to the aid of the party. But lofty disdain for the trivia of government makes Gordon Brown Labour's most bankable asset. One day even his most critical colleagues will feel only gratitude and relief that the worst that can be said about him is that he possesses a puritanical determination to distinguish between the deserving and the undeserving poor.  William Ewart Gladstone said that, in politics, things are best done by those who believe in them. It is hard to imagine the intellectually fastidious Gordon Brown arguing with any conviction that the idea of the prime minister walking down Whitehall to greet the Queen Mother's coffin emanated from the foreign secretary's discovery that the sun was shining and that Her Majesty's ministers would enjoy the fresh air. If he was the sort of man who willingly repeated the official line on Newsnight, he would just be another run-of-the-mill party politician. After all, we never read predictions that John Reid will be the next prime minister.  Nobody who recalls the grace with which he faced his daughter's death or heard the eulogy which he delivered at Donald Dewar's funeral can doubt that there is a human being inside Gordon Brown's invariably charcoal grey suit. But his addiction to work and the certainty that what he is doing at the moment is more important than anything that occupies anyone else, does make him a difficult colleague. It also attracts the criticism that his single-mindedness is self-centred. Had the consolation notes to recent ministerial rejects been signed by any other minister, they would not have rated even a gossip column mention. But we all assume that Gordon Brown does everything on purpose. No doubt the next leadership election is always at the back of his mind. And he does not seem to realise he is already close to invincible. Yet he persists in making progress toward the summit of the greasy pole on his own terms.  A couple of weeks ago Gordon Brown gave the Aneurin Bevan Memorial Lecture. The chairman, Geoffrey Goodman, once the doyen of labour correspondents and still an authority on Labour politics, described the speech as "what the party has been waiting for since 1997". Most members will have to go on waiting. No text was available. The chancellor spoke from extended notes. A member of the audience believed that had the lecture been widely reported, hundreds of party members, tempted to resign in disillusion, would have stayed to support Gordon Brown. As Mark Antony almost said, ambition should be made of more assiduous stuff. Eventually, after much prompting and the chancellor's insistence that he did the job himself, the notes were made into continuous prose and one newspaper thought them sufficiently important to be given some late attention. However, on the day before publication Stephen Byers resigned. All available space was needed for the obsequies and the ministerial reshuffle which followed. Gordon Brown said not a word on either subject.  And quite right too. What has the government gained by John Prescott's allegation that Byers was stabbed in the back or, for that matter, what advantage has been achieved by David Blunkett's suggestion that the newspapers are on the verge of lunacy? Gordon Brown's belief that he has better things to do than slug it out with the tabloid newspapers is an immense encouragement to people who think that politics should be a battle of ideas not images. God willing the spasm of playground politics has now ended. If there is another outbreak of juvenilia, the government in general and Tony Blair in particular have the strongest possible vested interest in keeping Gordon Brown above the fatuous battle.