I am absolutely certain that, sometime during last year, Norman Baker - the Liberal Democrat MP for Lewes - exposed what he regarded as a political scandal and that, in consequence, he appeared on television for several consecutive days. As I cannot recall what the so-called cause clbre concerned, I assume that it did not have a lasting effect on the life of the nation. But it certainly had an effect on Mr Baker. He developed a taste for unearthing impropriety. Last week, the Sussex Savonarola dug out details of the prime minister's Egyptian holiday. The mining metaphor is not altogether appropriate. For what Mr Baker believed to be dirt was buried in the public pages of the Register of Members' Interests. Tony Blair had, therefore, already announced that the Cairo government had paid part of the cost of the holiday in Sharm el-Sheikh and that he had made a donation of an equivalent amount to an Egyptian charity. By denouncing the arrangement as "cheapening the office of prime minister", Mr Baker cheapened the whole business of politics.  Politicians who are determined to say something, but have nothing of value to say, have developed the unhealthy habit of accusing their opponents of corruption, certain that - justified or not - their allegations will be reported. Last week some silly ass suggested that, because she lives in Downing Street, Cherie Blair offended against the rules of propriety by seeing her professional colleagues and clients in her own home. It is all part of the degeneration of politics from arguments about conflicting policies to claims about rival personalities.  Last week's example of that unhappy trend was the revelation - soon after the government had announced its intentions to relax the gaming laws - that the Labour party had accepted a donation of £100,000 from Peter Coates, the owner of a company called Provincial Racing. All the commentators could think of was the possibility that the gambling free-for-all was intended to repay Mr Coates's generosity. The real explanation is less sinister but equally disturbing. Indeed to me, it is rather worse than "cash for legislation". A corrupt government might change its ways. One which has abandoned its philosophy is more difficult to rehabilitate.  I have absolutely no doubt that Mr Coates's gift had no direct effect on the government's decision to allow gambling of every sort to spread like an infection through Britain. New Labour is not corrupt; its collective sin is the combination of arrogance and naivety which encourages the belief that the world is full of rich men who want to make a selfless contribution to the "project". When a donation is handed over, I doubt if the idea that it was written out in the hope of favours passes through the recipient's mind. But I am equally sure that the man who signed the cheque hoped for something in return.  That was certainly the case when the Tories used to complain that the trade unions were Labour's paymasters. Unions raised the political levy and used it to finance a political party which shared their aims and sometimes legislated explicitly on their behalf. That was both legitimate and laudable. Labour had been founded to support their interests and defend the welfare of their members. Even without their subventions, Labour would have initiated policies of which they approved. The party was neither bought nor sold.  There is no legitimate complaint against a vicar who accepts a large donation to his church restoration from a regular worshipper within his parish. If, on the other hand, a payment is made in recognition of the incumbent changing faith - against the wishes of his congregation - the transaction may not be financially corrupt, but it is certainly morally dubious. The payment is being made as a reward for apostasy.  The rector of Downing Street will say that his conversion is genuine - or perhaps that he never believed in the old religion and stumbled into the wrong church by mistake. That is a subject worth reasoned argument. It will not happen while cheap headlines suggest that business is bribing the government. It is not. The payments are a reward for the abandonment of socialism. The companies pay up, as the unions once did, because they think that New Labour is on their side. And, of course, they are right. When Mr Blair cooperates with Silvio Berlusconi to demand a more flexible labour market in Europe, he is making the CBI feel as warm towards him as the TUC felt towards Labour leaders when they promised to repeal the Trades Disputes Act.  Yet New Labour's alliance with industry is hardly, if ever, discussed in ideological terms. Indeed, it only breaks to the surface of most newspapers when it can - usually wholly illegitimately - be described as sleaze. There are just too many Norman Bakers about.