Asked by Jeremy Paxman why he was getting married, Charles Kennedy replied: 'Because I'm in love.' This quaint response did not satisfy his questioner, who accused the Liberal Democrat leader of making a very public statement at a time when many people opt not to marry. How impertinent of Mr Paxman. Weddings may no longer be the province of Colette's 'young girls with papier-mch faces' and adolescent bridegrooms in hired Moss Bros, but there is an upsurge of veteran enthusiasts. Ron Davies, the former Welsh Secretary, is to marry his partner, Lynn Hughes, whom he met following his nemesis on Clapham Common and his subsequent divorce. Prince Charles, it is rumoured, may soon exchange vows with Camilla Parker Bowles, now the Church of England has lifted its ban on marrying divorcees.  As the Bishop of Winchester put it, the clergy can no longer keep its hands clean on remarriage. The problem for the church is that the demand for even grubby-fingered vicars is scant. The Office for National Statistics' latest figures show that only two in five ceremonies are religious, compared with more than half in 1991.  Still, weddings are increasing for the first time in eight years. Almost 268,000 couples got married in 2000, up 1.7 per cent on the previous 12 months and a sign, according to the pro-marriage lobby, of a revived institution. Not quite. The small rise was largely due to divorced people remarrying. Some serial monogamists will end up eternally content; for others the future pattern is Henry VIII minus the blood. The rate of break-up in marriages between two divorcees has doubled in two decades.  None of this is a reason not to marry. Charles Kennedy's wedding is a cause for celebration, however sour Mr Paxman might be. The point is that not getting married is equally valid, except to evangelists such as Linda Waite, a Chicago sociologist now advising British people trapped in bad relationships that staying together will make them happier than divorce.  Although Professor Waite's work must be conducted with an academic rigour untainted by her affinity with God and the Waltons, her surveys always look as perfectly cooked-up as a Martha Stewart apple pie. Invariably, they deem that married women (though not as content as men) are healthier and happier than their single counterparts. In future studies, Ms Waite will no doubt be proving that matrimony increases one's chances of becoming a lottery millionaire and Pulitzer prizewinner, besides insuring against cellulite and unwanted nasal hair.  While her findings deviate from the Wildean idea that marriage is 'as demoralizing as cigarettes, and far more expensive', they fail to establish why enthusiasm for the institution remains so low. Maybe, in a secular age, weddings, whether conducted at St Paul's or the West Bromwich Albion supporters' club, have become commercial and arid. The current Brides magazine contains, squashed between adverts for designer lace, a letter from a reader needing a cheap wedding. Serve sparkling wine instead of champagne, an agony aunt advises.  Let them drink Freixenet. This rallying cry may fail to usher the destitute to the altar, let alone reverse the broader trend. By 2021, cohabitants are likely to reach three million and outnumber married couples. Already, a quarter of babies are born out of marriage. As social mores have shifted, English law, which does not recognise cohabitation, has grown, if anything, less accommodating. The notion that being a common-law wife had any legal status disappeared in   Lord Hardwicke's Marriage Act of 1753.  Far from being destroyed by Labour, as the Right always moans, marriage offers a lucrative cushion of tax breaks and financial guarantees for life. Property, pension and assets are for slicing up, post-divorce. Cohabitees, conversely, are entitled to nothing if a partnership ends. The first serious move against this imbalance came a few months ago in Lord Lester's abandoned Private Members' Bill, which proposed legal rights for gay and heterosexual couples who signed up to civil partnerships.  Why should a woman who has brought up her partner's children and looked after him and his house for most of her life be left destitute because she did not marry? Why should a man be made homeless because he had to pay inheritance tax after his male partner of 30 years died? Despite the urgency of such questions, some Ministers reportedly claimed that they would not be supporting the Lester Bill because the Law Commission, the Government's legal reform body, was completing a report on the whole issue.  The Commission was doing no such thing. Instead it had restricted itself to the narrower matter of rights to shared homes. On Thursday, baffled by trying to cut a deal that fitted incumbents ranging from a granny in an annexe to an abandoned lover, it announced that it had failed to come up with any solution.  This bizarre end to years of deliberation coincided with a separate blueprint from the Law Society, which last week ratified an internal report calling for registered civil partnerships. It also recommended, in an advance on Lester, redress for vulnerable ex-partners, whether or not they have opted into any formal system. As both the Law Society and the Law Commission urge a national debate, the Government says vaguely that its review of civil partnerships is 'ongoing'.  Ministers are nervous. The family values militants must, like some ghastly maiden aunt, be soothed and placated. The whiff of a fairer alternative always provokes tirades against cohabitation; supposedly a disposable arrangement for the feckless. But when the law expressly outlaws commitment, it is unsurprising that unmarried relationships look less durable.  In France and Sweden, where cohabitants have the legal safeguards decreed by almost all European countries, civil partnerships are as durable as marriages. Maybe intolerance underpins our talent for churning out 'feral' children; the truants and the failures. Perhaps there is an allied reason why British girls under the age of consent are eight times more likely to get pregnant than their French and Swedish counterparts. Relationships seen as legally sub-standard and morally dubious must be less likely to produce model citizens.  If cohabitation were a rarity, the effects of discrimination would impact only on individuals. But when not marrying becomes the norm, the unfairness of the current system risks corroding a society encouraged to be in thrall to skewed nostalgia.  Married coupledom, from the Macbeths to the Shipmans, has never been the idyll its supporters claim. The aftershock of marital schism and breakdown is apparent everywhere; in hideous domestic violence figures or in the death of Claude Mubiangata and his four children in a burnt-out car. Tragedy and horror are not the monopoly of the married, but nor do Handel and orange blossom offer a talisman against disaster.  There have been some advances towards accepting diverse lifestyles. Gay partners of MPs and civil servants now have the same rights as married couples, and adoption is less proscribed. It is vital now that the Government spurns the pro-marriage militia and moves faster. While the law and society should not dictate how people live, nor is it their role to damage those who can't or won't subscribe to an arcane agenda.