Politician's families shouldn't dabble in policy. The odium heaped on Cherie Booth over a dozen coded words on Palestine showed how rigidly this maxim is applied. Unless you happen to be a son of the Home Secretary. Last week's decision to scrap the snoopers' charter was partly informed by Hugh Blunkett, a computer specialist of no formal constitutional status, who advised his dad to back off plans for wider access to communications data. A child's intervention is not the same as a wife's. Nor did Hugh publicly query Home Office policy. Even so, the contrast was odd. Exaggerated newspaper reports asserting that the Minister's son had singlehandedly overturned a draft order conferred Socratic wisdom on Blunkett Minor. Ms Booth, less gloriously, was branded a Hamas cheerleader, operating far outside her remit.  The distinction is simple. Hugh Blunkett is a hero because everyone wants their emails kept private. Cherie Booth is pilloried not because her allusion to the hopelessness of young suicide bombers was too political, but because the Right don't like what they think she was saying. If she had argued for, say, the restitution of the married couples' tax allowance or clemency for householders who murder burglars, the reaction would have been the opposite. Ms Booth, absolved of sins ranging from banging on about human rights to wearing pixie boots at the races, would have been hailed as the advocate of reason.  Instead, an apology was issued from Downing Street, where her remark may also have caused alarm. Although the Government opposes Israeli occupation and demands a Palestinian state, the suspicion is that stick-with-Bush pragmatism comes first. Besides, Mr Blair   has been this way before. When Jack Straw, quick to offer a qualified defence of Cherie, upset Ariel Sharon by making a very similar point about despair in Palestine, the Prime Minister had to intervene to salvage last September's peace talks.  This, one imagines, has been a lonely week for Cherie, an offender against the orthodoxies of the cautious Left and the bullish Right. Some who fit neither template will be repelled by her sentiments. Others will agree with her and think they understand what underlies one sentence, awkwardly blurted out. A member of a generation drawn into politics by outrage over Palestine's fate, she is also a mother involved with charities for the young. Why would she not be appalled by the fate of children bred for immolation?  To infer disregard for dead Israeli citizens is wrong. Those who suggested that she would have been in the clear had she deplored the latest bus bomb may have been shiny humanitarians, but most came across as hypocrites advising the spun platitudes they affect to despise.  How political can Cherie Booth afford to be? The last high-profile outsider to invite a similar furore was Gretta Duisenberg, who draped the Palestinian flag over her apartment balcony in Amsterdam. Despite relenting after death threats against her and pleas from her husband, Wim, Mrs Duisenberg remained imperious. She might be married to the head of the European Central Bank, but she was a free woman who could do what she wanted. While Ms Booth may not share Mrs Duisenberg's views, she might envy her ability to air them.  For partners of senior British politicians, liberty has traditionally been strictly rationed and tact mandatory. Obviously, there have been lapses. On being informed, in 1937, that the leader of the Opposition was to get a salary, a gleeful Violet Attlee told the press that at last she would be able to afford enough maids to run her   home properly.  Ramsay MacDonald's wife was so lacking in Liz Hurley-style presentational skills that when someone bought her an expensive blouse for a Downing Street function, she wore it back to front. Tory partners have been more reliably schooled never to shock and to intervene in politics only  in extremis. Thus, when Alec Douglas-Home began a premier's speech: 'I'm very glad to be here in Moscow', his wife saved him by hissing into one ear: 'Peking, Alec, Peking.'  Years on, and despite mould-breakers like Glenys Kinnock, etiquette cautions leaders' spouses to be solid, silent and supportive. Folklore still decrees that a politician has no greater asset than a family. This idea should have expired around the time that David Mellor arranged his then wife and children on a five-barred gate for the photocall intended to eclipse his affair with Antonia de Sancha and rescue his political career.  John Major's conflation of sexual morality and party diktat produced an impressive enough array of unfaithful Ministers and stand-by-your-man loyalists to undermine his government and make the Hamiltons the patron saints of uxorious virtue. Long after back to basics fizzled out, the political family remains a dubious image-builder.  Families are often a poor barometer for policy, as the 'Euan test' for Blair's Dome showed. Teenage sons get drunk, or scowl through photocalls, and even babies offer unforeseen perils, particularly if lacking full MMR certification. Mayor Livingstone, busy denying allegations of a brawl following a row because his pregnant girlfriend was smoking, never had this trouble as a singleton newt-fancier.  The moral is that families are messy, unpredictable and a world apart from   Norma Major's chintzy idyll of Teasmades and cheese-freezing. Just how political a statement this image actually was became clear when Norma was finally wheeled out as the Tories' 'secret weapon'; an emblem of proper wifeliness to counter Cherie, silent but pushy. Since then, Ms Booth has revolutionised the role of consort; chairing Downing Street summits and challenging her husband's government in court.  She has been mostly, but not always, skilful. Her wish for a public platform, coupled with privacy on demand, has sometimes seemed an uneasy fit, especially to critics alert for any addendum to an encylopaedia of alleged faults, ranging from cellulite and yawning in church to getting the MoD to help with homework and usurping the role of PM. If her critics were less dim, they would see that Ms Booth is potentially their greatest ally.  Her Middle East remark was not a blunder. It was the sign of someone prepared, in an age of the tame and the mute, to hold an unscripted belief and air it. This tendency is likely to trouble Labour spin-doctors at least as much as the Tory media. Any whiff of indiscretion on Cherie's part raises the interesting question of what, for example, she might think about her husband's plans for victim-led justice, scrapping double jeopardy and docking benefit from parents whose children play truant.  How much more useful if we knew. A modern democracy eager for transparency is intelligent and wise enough to distinguish between the views of elected representatives and their unelected spouses. Why on earth shouldn't Ms Booth offer her views like any other citizen and justify them herself?  Presumably because it suits too many enemies to portray her as a meddlesome self-promoter and too many friends to pass her off as a penitent who erred. She should regard last week not as a humiliation but as the first move against all those who think the safe response to crises, however grave or heartrending, is a blend of nodding-dog politics and muzzled women.