Be very afraid. The Home Secretary implies the streets are dangerous. Liza Minnelli almost gets mugged on her latest honeymoon. A pigtailed yob of 11 may be hurling breeze blocks through the window of a shop near you. Three thousands offenders currently enduring Her Majesty's oversubscribed hospitality will soon be out, tagged but supposedly casting lascivious glances at the Volvos and Vodafones of a nation on high alert. Few, give or take the lowland fox, can think themselves protected now. In Wimbledon, some rich women barely venture out, for fear of being carjacked on their way to a lettuce lunch. In Primrose Hill, a security firm offers UN-style protection to citizens unloading groceries from people-carriers. In an ICM poll, Labour's lead falls from 17 points to nine because voters are terrified of street crime.  But the economy prospers, retail sales are up 1.5 per cent and the daffodils are out. Despite Quatermass politics and newspaper hysteria, the streets feel as safe as they always did. They are. In 1981, Britons had a one in 200 chance of being attacked by a stranger. The same statistic applies today. Under the red tape theorem, the more pen-pushing police officers you have, the higher the number of recorded crimes. The British Crime Survey, a more trusted measure, says that overall crime fell by a third between 1995 and 2000 and that violent offences dropped by a fifth in the final year of the last century.  The subsequent rise in street crime is mainly due to mobile phone thefts.   Phone-snatching is not, as some suggest, a playground craze, like hopscotch with menaces, but neither is it evidence of civil meltdown. There is no shortage of grim areas and tragedy; a 15-year-old boy is stabbed to death; a woman of 82 is robbed for the fourth time in as many years. But random crimes, however brutal, offer little evidence for notions that most law-abiding citizens are holed up in Mugabe Mansions with drug-crazed psychopaths baying at the gates.  So what's going on? David Blunkett wants serious money from Gordon Brown and offers some grim tableaux to make his case. That bullishness is only part of it. Lurid press stories of kids from hell have not helped Mr Blunkett. On the contrary, public unease may have prompted his summons, with the Metropolitan Police Commissioner, to Downing Street. Mr Blair offered support but will also have demanded some solutions.  The Prime Minister favours 'eye-catching initiatives'. His wish-list is, however, unlikely to include the spectacle of more public sparring between Mr Blunkett and Sir John Stevens, who share a desire that no crisis should ever knowingly be undersold. Dramas breed fear and Mr Blunkett risks becoming the victim of a muddled and febrile mood his high profile has helped engender. In January, he sought to damp down public anxiety, announcing that the chances of becoming a crime victim were the lowest in 20 years. Last week, he warned that we must 'reclaim the streets'.  The mantra is one of toughness, but jails are full and prisoners will be released early. Marching yobs to cashpoints, one of Mr Blair's less felicitous eye-catchers, is back on the agenda in amended form. And the Home Secretary professes 'bewilderment at the debate going on'. Mr Blunkett's not the only one. Nor is he, a Minister who has done some fine things (and a few appalling ones), a prime culprit. He is simply part of a modern jigsaw of confusion. Hierarchies of trust were never reliable, but now few gold standards, or even bog standards, of impartiality, consistency and objective assessment exist in public life. Lord Woolf, the great rehabilitator, demands that young, mobile phone robbers are jailed. Reports linking the Chancellor's mission to rescue the NHS with his baby daughter's death hint that private tragedy informs public policy. The suggestion may be preposterous, but a doubt is sown.  Geoff Hoon says he is 'absolutely confident' that, in the right conditions, Britain would be willing to use nuclear weapons against Iraq or any other rogue state. Suddenly, Mr Hoon, a Minister to whom one would hesitate to entrust a peashooter, is a master of the embattled universe, brandishing nukes against Saddam and dispatching 1,700 troops to fight the guerrillas of al-Qaeda.  To wonder whether the Defence Secretary has a clue about what he is doing does not imply the slightest disrespect. In the war against terror, publicity swamps insight at all levels. When few have any knowledge and everyone has an agenda, the capacity for disinformation is spectacular. President Bush has exploited it to the full. After months of propaganda, bin Laden remains at large, Mullah Omar is presumably pedalling the cycle lanes of Gardez and no one can explain exactly what mission confronts outgoing British troops.  Last week, American defence chiefs announced compelling evidence that al-Qaeda had bases in Somalia. A day later, they retracted that proof as bogus. How lucky for Somali civilians that someone noticed one error in a catalogue of assertions too vague to satisfy the modern consumer in any sphere but war. You wouldn't buy a mail-  order sweatshirt on the data provided by the CIA, let alone a possible second Vietnam.  The less verifiable the truth, the more febrile the unrest. In Salem in 1692, old scores got settled 'on a plane of heavenly combat between Lucifer and the Lord'. Once again, it's fine to 'cry witch against one's neighbour', whether the target of suspicion hails from Yemen or Yarmouth. In war, as in crime, terror takes over when truth gets malleable. A quarter of women fear sexual assault, but only 0.078 per cent of victims report such an attack. One in five adults worries that his car will be stolen, when the chances are 1.5 in 100. The perception is that criminals walk free when, as Nacro's figures show, many more are being jailed.  Mr Blunkett's tagging initiative may actually drive up the prison population. Crime scares always do. With equal certainty, quiet voices are barely heard. The Prison Reform Trust's new report, Barred Citizens, makes the case for better rehabilitation. Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Constabulary warns that there is a dearth of analysis of 'what works and why'. Interest in allegations linking Commander Brian Paddick to gay sex on the Gatwick Express far exceeds calls to extend his successful drugs strategy for Lambeth. Car alarms and phone disablers stop crime, but dull measures don't get talked about.  Roll up instead for a ghost train ride of cheap thrills. It is easier to turn a child vandal into a media superstar than to ask what sort of a society produces, or gawps at, an 11-year-old girl who breaks up shops for fun. Or what kind of people are more interested in demonising 'evil' children than in devising a system to help stop three in four young offenders being reconvicted within two years of release. If society, in keeping with the hot moral rhetoric of the age, treats the young, the victimised and the deprived as beyond redemption, that is how they will emerge. And then it will be time to be afraid.