When ticking off the media for their 'corrosive' cynicism, Prince Charles likes to quote the last lines of  Middlemarch. His fondness for this hymn to unsung heroes must mean he thinks George Eliot an ally in bolstering respect for the monarchy. Perhaps the prince does not know that she was much more subversive than the torpid hordes now declining to make jellies for the jubilee. During a flirtation with republicanism, Eliot referred to Victoria, her contemporary and sometime fan, as 'our little humbug of a queen'. Which just shows that you are never safe from cynics. Charles Clarke thinks elements of the press are 'actually about promotion of cynicism'. Tony Blair, on his recent visit to Africa, lambasted 'the cynics back home'. Greg 'cut the crap' Dyke offers yellow cards to can't-do sceptics on his staff, and Gavyn Davies berates 'white, middle-class, middle-aged' whingers complaining about dumbing down the BBC. Alas, Mr Davies's tirade has only invoked a further flurry of cynicism from those who fear that, if Rolf Harris is the jewel of arts programming, it cannot be long before nu-metal band Slipknot is kicking Saint-Sans off Radio 3.  We are losing faith in old institutions, and they are losing faith in us. Early next month, the political philosopher Onora O'Neill will address the first of her BBC Reith lectures to the collapse of trust between the British people and the Civil Service, the medical profession, politicians, church and business. It is not certain what Lord Reith might have thought of Mr Dyke's 'Operation Top   Dog' fact-finding trip to the United States, complete with a stay in a hotel reportedly favoured by Mick Jagger. Nor is it known what Baroness O'Neill, a latter-day Kantian and Lords cross-bencher, will make of her subject matter. I hope she calls it for the cynics.  Cynicism is the fuel of public life. When political ideology and money get sparse, it is a prime deliverer of standards and probity. Blind trust in business is, post-Enron, only for the gullible and shredder salesmen. Unquestioning belief in doctors led to abysmal regulation and arrogance. Those are replaced now, thanks to cynicism, with greater transparency, convictions for the Dewhurst branch of gynaecology, plus the hope that babies are no longer likely to be killed at Bristol or bottled at Alder Hey.  But for cynicism, we might marvel at the altruism of Edward and Sophie, believe that Signor Berlusconi is the new prophet of workplace fairness and trust that women who use the right brand of shampoo can rely on mermaid hair. No wonder politicians search for the elixir of squandered faith.  Too late. Cynicism is the new politics, and how useful it can be to Ministers professing to abhor it. In an age of innocence, Mr Blair's endorsement of creationist teaching at Emmanuel School in Gateshead would be truly worrying. Now it matters less that children, as neo-Darwinians such as Richard Dawkins rightly protest, are being fed 'ludicrous falsehoods'.  The failsafe is that children, even sheltered ones, are cynical rationalists. The debate between evolution and creation was settled, for good and in the former's favour, in the 1860 Oxford debate between between T.H. Huxley and Bishop Samuel Wilberforce. Any teacher now hopeful of persuading streetwise Limp Bizkit fans that God created the world quicker than Glenys Kinnock can rustle up a Fray Bentos supper is likely also to believe in Santa Claus.  But politicians think scepticism a sin to be excised. There is something sly, cynical even, in their attempts to re-engage an electorate of whom fewer than 60 per cent voted in the last election. (Even this figure is less worrying in the context of Robert Mugabe's 112 per cent turn-out in some polling stations, but that is by the way.) Moves towards e-democracy and away from in-your-face campaigning are about machinery, not message. Nor do Ministers acknowledge their own double standard. Apathy, the hated twin of cynicism, is the Ritalin of the masses and thus the drug of political dreams.  If people were as apathetic as politicians complain, there would have been no fuel protests, no anti-globalisation marches, no MMR furore, no Garbagegate. While not all of these are desirable, they demonstrate plenty of engagement in politics. It's just all the wrong sort, supposedly practised by selfish, embittered carpers encouraged to stick the boot into the corpse of deference by a cynical media in thrall to New Cynicism.  Old cynicism looked different. The founder of the Cynic sect, Antisthenes, was a fifth-century BC philosopher so avid for moral wisdom that he travelled every day from Piraeus to Athens (tricky by public transport, even in pre-Byers times) to hear Socrates speak. His disciples' code of strict religious observance, ragged cloaks and revolt against decadence seems, give or take Mittalgate, pink pinstripes by Sir Paul Smith and a BlairForce One jet (cancelled), more in tune with the pious ways of political leaders than with the electorate. Who are the real cynics now?  It's hard to judge, when each side thinks the other so corrupted. The certainty is that politicians have not grasped that the British electorate, while abhorring mendacity and sleaze, prefers cynicism to zealotry in its leaders. Morality drives Tony Blair to support currently indefensible action against Iraq. George Bush, a President of unimpeachable godliness, maintains his   axis of good by tearing up weapons treaties and sending a mentally-ill mother who killed her children to jail for 40 years. If this is virtue, one can only wonder what terrors Saddam's evil entails.  We will have to keep on guessing. The dossier that appalled Mr Bush and Mr Blair is locked in Dick Cheney's briefcase, to be fluttered in front of Middle Eastern leaders who seemed suspiciously unscandalised by the Vice-President's proof. In less doubting times, any government move towards military action against Iraq would be deemed as scrupulously tested as a Which? best-buy toasted-sandwich maker. Instead, there is scant enthusiasm. So thank heavens for cynicism, the province of satirists from Molire to Wilde and the last long-stop of democracy. We are going to need it.  That doesn't mean that Mr Blair fails wholly to understand public disillusion. In his convincing speech at the LSE, the Prime Minister ditched the messianic, rabbit-out-of-the-hat salvationism pitched somewhere between Martin Luther King and Paul Daniels. His gospel of public service delivery won't enthuse potential voters, any more than Barcelona smallprint will captivate those stuck on a commuter train at Luton Parkway. But as a move towards the more sober dialogue the Government wants, calm objectives beat both hot rhetoric and the anti-media witchhunts so popular with Ministers and royalty.  As Charles should consider next time he dusts off his  Middlemarch, such tactics offer an uncomfortable echo of Jonathan Aitken's promise to beat 'bent and twisted journalism' with his 'simple sword of truth'. Establishment moaners will have to find a better remedy against public scornfulness. It would be helpful to Mr Blair if young people were inspired by activism, but grassroots politics, like Passing Cloud cigarettes and jitterbugging, is a redundant craving. Enthusing voters will become easy only when government rebrands cynicism as the manna it professes to crave; the holy grail of reasoned opposition.