The on-off British love affair with work is back on. The down-shifters of the Nineties have furtively shifted up again, abandoning wisteria-clad cottages and homemade green bean chutney for Prozac and prestige. The Chancellor propels lone parents towards jobs and declines to abandon his own, even for a few days' paternity leave. Oldies step down reluctantly (Sir Magdi Yacoub) or not at all (Mick Jagger). According to  Management Today, six-day weekers have halved to one in 10. Still, the spectre of workplace tyranny lingers. Nearly everyone wants a job, as long as it's flexible. Patricia Hewitt has been clever in advancing elastic working hours. The edict that employers must, by 2003, consider seriously requests for flexibility by parents of children under six has, predictably, enraged Ruth Lea of the Institute of Directors. Ms Lea can be relied upon, in any work-related drama, for an obliging shake of gory locks and dire hints that women won't get jobs at all if they demand remission for the school nativity play, let alone hours as malleable as Play-Doh. This fury eclipses the fact that industry isn't worried. The Hewitt plan could hardly be more business-friendly.  All parents get is the right to ask, in the same way that Bob Cratchit would, presumably, have been entitled to broach with Ebenezer Scrooge the possibilities of subsidised gym membership, luncheon vouchers and a better work-life balance. Despite offering the possible redress of a tribunal, the Hewitt plan is feeble. It is also a triumph for the Department of Trade and Industry, since business is both the scapegoat and the victor. Meanwhile, government can slither out of the debate we should be having about working parents. Flexible hours, far from being the central issue, are a diversion at best and a fraud at worst.  For a start, they are discriminatory. The more privileged you are, the more flex you get. Cherie Booth is able to be a mother-of-four, promoter of charities, part-time consort to the Prime Minister, sartorial adviser to Afghan women and still find time for a session in the Bharti Vyas Flowtron trousers because of her job, not despite it. If she had been a Tesco check-out operator rather than a leading human rights barrister, she would have been fired long ago.  Wealthy people who really do have long hours can buy flexibility. Domestic service accounts for almost 10 per cent of the workforce, and cleaners, nannies and gardeners combined now exceed the numbers employed in accountancy, water and gas supply or the railways. As an antidote, or an incitement, to presenteeism, City firms will get your sink unblocked, dry cleaning done or dog shampooed, so that leisure time, however brief, can be devoted to lifestyle rather than to messy living.  Ideally, we would all work less and have more say over hours. But, despite horror stories about Gradgrind employers and vindictive non-parents, workers do get some say. In general, the work-life debate is conducted by gloomy protagonists who have a choice over how much they work and earn on behalf of those who don't. For the latter group, flexibility is half-dream, half-euphemism. Mostly, it means part-time. Thirty years after the introduction of the Equal Pay Act, women still earn, on average, four-fifths of men's take-home pay. The big losers are the short-hours women earning 60 per cent of what a man would be getting if he were doing the same job on a full-time basis. Though women full-timers do better, on 80 per   cent of a typical male wage, the gender gap has barely narrowed in the last decade. An effective move towards reducing women's hours without also shortening men's can only reinforce a worse deal for women and for children.  In Tuesday's pre-budget report, we shall start to see how serious Gordon Brown is about abolishing child poverty by 2020 and how the competing claims of deprivation and public services will balance out. Although poor children get sicker, stay poorer and die sooner, they have the grace to do so quietly. Even those condemned to young offender institutions with, according to a new report, a typical reading age of seven, hardly cause a ripple unless they kill themselves or someone else while they are in there. It is impossible to have good schools and hospitals without first tackling poverty and the third of all children condemned to be poor. Their salvation, the Chancellor says, is best secured through jobs.  That path is not smooth, even leaving aside the contradictory stance of a government that shoos single parents out to work but lauds apple-pie notions of traditional families. More practically, an extra 1.5 million jobs may be needed to take one million children out of poverty down the work-based route. For those who are employed, flexible shelf-stacking or filing is unlikely much to enhance the lot of the working poor. It is true that they may be home for fish fingers and supervised homework, but quality time, a vision copyrighted by Middle England, seems much more delectable when viewed from a company boardroom through a mist of guilt.  It is unproven and implausible that children suffer emotionally when both their parents work full time (although such is the hype    that a quarter of all readers of the magazine,  Top Sant, thought, in recent survey, that it was so.) In addition, the great work-life balance argument is chiefly conducted in the absence of those without any work or much of a life to balance. So what are the answers?  First, that mothers (or fathers, if they are the main carer) of small children should never be compelled to work. Second, that securing part-time work, as of right, for new parents is the wrong crusade. Seven out of 10 mothers already go back on reduced hours. The real scandal is that those who want or need to work full time are obliged instead to stay at home or to take low-paid flexitime because the Government has failed to bring in the decent childcare it promised. Still, only one in seven children under eight gets offered a registered place.  The remedy - 10,000 children's centres demanded by the Daycare Trust - would cost an extra £2.5 billion a year, or 5 per cent of education spending, offer means-tested care and allow women to work, full or part-time as they preferred. They would also supply the even start that Europe sees as a birthright and whose lack blights the lives of British children rendered unequal from the start.  The second necessity is to involve men. Although the Hewitt proposals claim to be for them too, everyone knows that few forklift drivers or vice-presidents of Paribas will demand to be home for bathtime, partly through breadwinner stereotyping but also because society has a growing problem with fathers; classified, hopefully, as Mrs Doubtfires (for current partners) or as feckless deserters (in the case of absent ones).  But, violent men apart, bad husbands often make good fathers. Discriminating against them is unfair to children, to whom everyone listens too little, and a block to fair-shares parenting. Part-time equality is not an option. As for flexible working, long hours rarely damage children. Poverty always does.