By the time Posh Spice admitted that her lip ring was a fake, the piercing parlours of Britain had been inundated by imitators. 'She is a real cow,' said one hole-punched acolyte. 'She must have known fans would copy her.' Of course. Every time Posh's husband has some new variant personal topiary, a cloned army turns out with Mohican haircuts or half an eyebrow. Who knows better than the Beckhams that we are the most susceptible nation on earth? The Government, for one. A policy consultant to the Department of Health claims that  EastEnders and Coronation Street have replaced the State as the main source of sex education for children. Simultaneously, Tony Blair is being urged by liberal commentators to borrow his thinking on teenage pregnancy and lone parents from more dubious sources. Bill Clinton's tough love is working, according to two US think-tanks. Compulsion and welfare withdrawal have wrought a miracle. Fewer teenagers get pregnant. More single mothers go out to work. Left-wing Jeremiahs predicting misery and poverty have been proved wrong. Except they haven't.  The think-tank findings, like Clinton's initiative, are nothing new. We have known for some time that the US cut its welfare bill by $9 billion between 1992 and 1998. That period showed a 40 per cent reduction in those claiming benefit, and the number of lone parents working rose from 44 to 57 per cent. We also know the dire trends underpinning the headline results. Coercion and a five-year lifetime limit on claiming welfare meant that the poorest were left to sink. Of the supposed success stories, almost half of those who found work earned less than they got on benefit. Two-thirds of welfare-leavers in Wisconsin lived below the US poverty line.  A moral climate in which parents go on Oprah to renounce their 'welfare mother' status as if they are kicking heroin has no resonance in Britain. Nor is there much appetite for a system that forces mothers to return to live with hostile parents or violent partners as the alternative to destitution. But, beyond all that, there is no crisis here. As One Parent Families points out, lone parent families have stabilised at around 1.7 million. Teenage pregnancies are the lowest since 1994. The divorce rate is falling. Big problems remain, but the statistics do not invite panic, let alone a return to a sterile quest to manipulate social behaviour by economic whip-cracking.  The debate over whether such tactics could work was held and lost in the Eighties. And yet, curiously, the new American research has not been questioned here. Its findings, whiskery and disturbing, have been greeted effusively. Blair is being chivvied to abandon his crusade to eliminate child poverty in favour of compulsion, cruelty and creating a new caste of the destitute.  Why are we suddenly so gullible? The answer goes wider than social policy. Increasingly, we are trapped in a copycat culture that seeps into almost every area of life. Everyone, the theory goes, does everything better than us. We can't boil an egg unless Delia shows us how, or paint the spare bedroom in any shade of emulsion lacking the Carol Smillie imprimatur, or pull up a weed without first consulting Charlie Dimmock's breasts. A  Radio Times survey last week claimed that more than one in two Britons does not necessarily need human contact but feels lonely if deprived of a television role model. Private reliance on the views and the guidance of strangers, however, is mild compared with the filching habit of the magpies in the public domain. Like a snoopy neighbour wanting the loan of a cup of sugar, the Government is continually on the borrow from next door.  Required items for the national begging bowl this week include the following: 1. More foreign doctors and nurses, as usual. Plus French and German hospital beds for sprightly South-East dwellers. Sick and elderly northerners must continue, usefully, to clog up the waiting-lists that Alan Milburn needs as the chief rationing tool for an inadequate health service. 2. Some teachers. Lightly qualified Australian back-packers welcome, along with graduates from Africa and India. This, as the head of VSO has said, is not recruitment. It is looting by a country terrifyingly bereft of its own resources and ideas.  Globalisation means a homogenised world of Starbucks, Gap and sponsored Labour Party conference events run like a Big Mac franchise, but that does not fully explain the deadweight of British dependency. Even last week's Zagat guide survey claiming that London is better than Paris for eating out fell short of an all-out endorsement of Britishness. Eight of the 10 highest-ranked restaurants are French-based. By way of reciprocity, the French are mad for  Bottom and Ab Fab, all of which show the British as sad and manic losers. The reason that the copy movie,  Absolument Fabuleux, has just bombed in French cinemas is partly because a self-confident nation can't emulate the savage self-satire engendered by a country undergoing a nervous collapse.  The flipside of our insecurity is always bombast. We may see ourselves as Blair's 'new internationalists', imbued with chicken tikka massala multiculturalism, but the media mood is for xenophobia. Off go our football fans, a Union Jack-draped yobocracy encouraged to view the Germans as sausage-chomping towel tyrants. In come euro notes and we are invited to pity those who must forgo the Queen and Sir Edward Elgar for ugly modernity. The message is that we are too individualistic and our culture too distinctive ever to bow to bland uniformity. If only. We are the Arthur Daley of the planet, engaged in a global rip-off campaign that extends from pizza toppings to maths teachers.  It isn't quite, as Samuel Johnson said, that almost all absurdity of conduct arises 'from the imitation of those whom we cannot resemble'. The additional problem is that we steal the wrong things from the wrong people. Gordon Brown, a Class A raider, quite usefully poached American schemes ranging from the Roosevelt-style New Deal to the tax breaks that created the US enterprise explosion of the Nineties as central planks of his policy. More dubiously, Jack Straw got his 'three strikes and you're out' automatic minimum sentences from the States. Labour politicians have bought US policy like trans-atlantic shoppers stockpiling tights from Bloomingdales.  But the sprees for fresh ideas are less rewarding now, and when a good one does emerge, notably Bob Kiley's Tube plan, the Chancellor insists, perversely, on a botched alternative. Copying is fine, but we need new, European icons. Germany demonstrates why proper status for teachers is the only answer to our schools crisis. France shows what a better health service can do. Holland suggests the wisdom, stubbornly rejected by us, of vaccinating against a foot-and-mouth epidemic. Our railways crumble, tourism slumps and even the body-piercing industry has been dealt a nasty blow by Posh. We are forced to import our teachers and export our sick.  When we need new ideas so fast, the only answer is to abandon we-know-best smugness and beef up our copycat culture. The time has come for kleptomania.