Babies and elections have always been, in the jargon of the moment, contiguous. This time round, there is a difference. Now babymania can jump species. Phoenix the calf, an emblem of Disney cuteness among mountains of scorched flesh, gets the livestock cull curtailed. Less flamboyantly, the 750,000 human infants born every year in Britain also score a victory. Each will soon have a dowry of £250 apiece, rising to £500 for the poorest. With three further top-ups of £100 and a government promise to match any family contributions, the least well-off 18-year-olds should end up with a modest nest egg, courtesy of the four fairy godfathers of government. David Blunkett is the political driver for the Child Trust Fund, successfully piloted in the US over the past decade and imported by the left-wing think tank, the IPPR. Alistair Darling is also keen on asset-building. An ominous silence hung over the Treasury when baby bonds were first mooted before Gordon Brown eventually proclaimed himself in favour of a plan designed to ensure that every newborn will enter the world with the word 'Prudence' practically stamped on his or her brow. As for Tony Blair, this idea had everything.  To the Right, it offered the camphorous odour of Thatcher's mothballed credo of a property-owning democracy. Baby-bonders would, in the Tory view, be the spiritual heirs to the Sids who snapped up shares and council houses.  To the Left, it bore the equally comforting whiff of progressive universalism. While the scheme's foundation, on the shaky faultline where Beveridge and   neo-liberalism collide, rendered it acceptable to almost all, the plan has a special resonance for Blair. In his 1999 conference speech, he described two babies, side by side in the labour ward and destined, if he had his wish, to live in a meritocratic society where all began life on an equal footing. Baby bonds match the policy to the dream. Better still, a scheme costing a modest £1 billion a year offers a branding unbuyable even by a government that splurges £62 million on three months' worth of advertising. This, the subtext reads, is an administration that loves poor children.  And still, our child poverty rate is the third highest in the industrialised world: 100,000 more children were plunged into hardship during the first two years of the Blair government. Although changes to tax and benefits have reversed that trend, more than three million children will remain below the breadline at the election. Of those, 600,000 of them could have been removed from income poverty if the £2.4bn forgone by last year's cut in the basic tax rate had been used to increase benefits.  Regressive taxes on cigarettes and petrol continue to clobber the poor, as does the Social Fund. The Social Security Select Committee recently reported that the fund, a model of Dickensian parsimony, exacerbates child poverty because parents cannot afford to repay crisis loans for items such as fridges and cookers. So far, the Government has resisted subsequent calls for a review.  As ever, the children of poor households continue to do worse at school and to get the worst-paid jobs, or none. By their late teens, that damage may be irreversible. Certainly the notion that 18-year-olds will emerge from a chrysalis of poverty into fully formed trustafarians, ready to spend with care (rather than to squander their money on drugs and drink as their rich-list equivalents tend to) seems unproven.  Nor are parents struggling to buy food and shoes likely to be sustained by the knowledge that their children are custodians of untouchable funds worth several thousand pounds. Perhaps such caveats count for little against a suspicion that approval from those debarred by extreme poverty from saving, including the seven out of 10 lone parents who currently have no back-up funds at all, is not the applause Labour most desires.  Despite last week's volte-face  allowing more generous parental leave, women of all backgrounds remain sceptical of a government perceived to have done too little on childcare provision and flexible working hours. So how helpful to have news programmes full of vox pops involving wards full of new 'mums' (not a father in sight, even on politically correct  Channel 4 News ) offering warm plaudits to Blair's largesse.  Though it would be cynical to accuse the Government of blatantly touting for votes among those impressed by its drive towards child equality, there is no doubt that some remain more equal than others. One minute, the Government is offering Hans Christian Andersen fairytale outcomes, in which all must have equal prospects. In the next, it sketches cautionary tales worthy of a Hoffman or a Belloc, on what must happen to those corrupted by the forces of exclusion.  Slap a curfew or a school exclusion order on them. March 'yobs' to cashpoints or incarcerate them in one of our scandalous young offenders' institutions to rot or, if especially unlucky, to die. Tony Blair's latest wheeze, to reward non-offending teenagers in high crime areas with vouchers for CDs or trainers, looks either like a belated balance of carrot to stick or the feeblest of pre-election gimmicks.  It may also be a sign that Blair, an expert on wayward adolescents    and infant innocents alike, has a Dr Spockish urge to treat the nation's children as his own. The trouble is that parenting is a haphazard, emotional affair, whereas politics is structured and calculating. Conflate the two and the upshot is the liberal press gurgling over Blair's plans while the  Daily Telegraph, simultaneously, infers the extinction of the welfare state and the advent of a US-style residuum.  The suspicion is that Blair is bowing to the perception that the views of Left and Right must, like the rich child and the poor, be equally indulged. In addition, political entrail-reading usefully magnifies the scope of what's really on offer. Baby bonds, and an allied savings scheme for poor adults, are a valuable gesture, but a tiny one. Suggesting that they are the foundation of a DIY society is as unrealistic as hoping to buy Chatsworth with Green Shield stamps.  Last week, Blair's personal think tank filled in the gaps on an anti-poverty strategy. The Performance and Innovation Unit urged him to increase income and inheritance tax and end the middle-class stranglehold on getting the best education. A meritocratic society depended, it said, on high social mobility and the absence of any association between class and opportunity. Such truisms bear repetition in a week when Blair plans to stick to his 1997 pledge not to put up income tax while his 'People's Peers', a Gilbert and Sullivan array of toffery, make the notion of democratic appointments look risible.  As for baby bonds, the enthusiasm of its reception should make Labour bolder and less disingenuous. Though the sketch is vague and the budget small, we would love it to work. But voters also know that children's lives cannot be transformed unless direct taxes rise. Blair should flesh out his trust plan, reform the Social Fund, step up the crusade to end child poverty by 2020 and concede that notions of forging equality on the cheap belong in the realm of storks and gooseberry bushes.