Robin cook likes a curry. I remember sitting opposite him in the Foreign Office canteen one lunchtime, watching him demolish a pile of tweed-coloured slurry draped over a gaudy heap of pilau rice. Personal preference may have informed his decision to spurn the Chinese takeaway (its image dented by foot and mouth) or the doner kebab (never a winner with the River Cafe set) and single out, during his speech to the Social Market Foundation, chicken tikka massala as a 'true British national dish'. How right Mr Cook is. There is something quintessentially British about the diner who piles out of the pub, 10 pints of lager to the wind, in search of an Indian meal to fortify him against a night of aggro. Nothing conjures up some aspects of our national culture more effectively than tanked-up, Union Jack-flapping soccer fans belting out the 1998 World Cup anthem of 'Vindaloo'. Even at the genteel end of the market, the flock wallpaper and acid lighting of the average high-street Indian takeaway evoke exhausting hours and low pay for its staff rather than get-ahead vibrancy. Cook might have been on safer ground if he had stipulated stuffed crust pizza or pot noodles as our culinary emblem of multiculturalism.  Alternatively, he could have recalled that politicians seeking to unfurl a vision of a certain type of Britain rarely sound convincing, whether their theme is cricket on the village green and spinsters cycling to Communion or an ode to an onion bhaji. Still, in some ways, the Baldwin of Brick Lane was successful. Given the febrile mood of the Opposition, all antidotes to racism are welcome.   As a bonus, Cook's catchy way into the race debate provoked predictable and gravy-curdling wrath from beef Wellington fans incensed by his statement that there was no such thing as an 'ethnically pure' British race.  Smoking out racism, in the Tory party and its supporters, would be more rewarding, but for the fact that the cheerleaders for Anglo-Saxon purity are so pathetic. John Townend was unknown before his recent anti-immigrant speech. Sir Richard Body, author of the xenophobically titled book,  England For the English , exudes as much Powellite menace as Peter Rabbit. James Cran and Eric Forth, opponents of the Commission for Racial Equality's code of electoral conduct, hardly add up to Jorg Haider and Jean-Marie Le Pen. Michael Portillo, the most senior non-signatory, is not a racist but a tactically- brilliant Judas whose gesture will endear him to all those Tories who cannot decide whether William Hague or the bossy CRE appals them more.  Hague is not a racist either. He is something almost worse, an opportunist who decided that it would be useful to mimic one. Hence his 'foreign land' speech, his authorisation of a leaflet on 'bogus asylum-seekers' and his swipe against the Macpherson Report. Some time ago, Andrew Lansley, the former Tory election strategist, told this newspaper that 'immigration played particularly well in the tabloids in the 1992 general election' and 'has more potential to hurt'. Now the pain is all Hague's. His attempt to be both asylum-seekers' scourge and immigrants' champion looks as fake as Lansley's assertion that his leader never played the race card.  Of course he did, but so has Cook; not through his message but by his omissions. In particular, his cosy, curry-house scenario seemed oddly pitched in the week when white and Asian communities in the north of England went to war. Whatever racial unrest exists in Britain today is less a product of Tory rants than of the reality of life in Britain under a   Labour administration which, as the Foreign Secretary did not say, has too often been a poor deliverer on issues involving race. Foot-dragging over the promised review of the iniquitous voucher scheme for asylum-seekers continues. The wider policy shambles has prompted the Council of Europe to castigate Britain for its treatment of migrants. While Hague might have been even harsher, the measure must be outcome, not intent.  Cook, like all his senior colleagues, is a committed anti-racist. Personal credo does not, however, entitle him or any of them to paint a vista of a wish-list Utopia and pass it off as the real thing. Modern Britain, however tolerant and well-integrated, is far from a frictionless haven. As Ofsted discovered last year, the failure gap between Afro-Caribbean and Pakistani pupils and their white counterparts is nearly double that of a decade ago. Students from ethnic minorities have a much lower chance of getting a job than white graduates. In one recent week on BBC2, the only non-white faces in the channel's top 10 programmes (combined viewing figures of 33 million) were those of cartoon characters in The Simpsons. While government cannot be held responsible for who joins Charlie Dimmock on  Ground Force , there is, in areas it can influence, too great a mismatch between rhetoric and results.  Despite the eagerness by Jack Straw and the Metropolitan police commissioner to apply the findings of Sir William Macpherson, old tensions reappear as the second anniversary of the report approaches. In Bradford last week, a fight at a Hindu wedding erupted into a car-burning, window-smashing, battle between white and Asian youths which echoed the devastating 1995 riot. In Oldham, the tribal battles between young Bangladeshi and Pakistani men have mutated into a new delineation of aggression. According to police, more than half of the 572 racist attacks recorded in the town during the last year have been against whites. However the battle lines are drawn, the causes remain a constant dirge of unemployment, overcrowding and bleak futures.  An exponential rise in the nationwide reporting of racist crime, up by 107 per cent over 12 months, no longer looks like Macpherson-inspired openness. It looks like more racist crime. That is not to criticise Sir William or those who seek to implement his recommendations. It is to say that there is a vast, unbridged gulf between semantics and solutions.  Presentationally the Government (asylum-seekers apart) has been a model of correctness, but signatures on CRE declarations and benedictions to Macpherson are the easy bits. They are also camouflage on the uncomfortable reality that, at a time when racial harmony is lauded and the economy is strong, too little has been achieved.  The conditions that create inner-city brawlers and school failures are also the complex issues of economic and social polarisation that fail to interest the Tories. The measure of their cynicism is that both Hague and Portillo have now, in different ways, mortgaged race issues to personal ambition.  As for the Government, Robin Cook's vision of a multicultural nation sitting down to break poppadoms together does not quite reflect a landscape in which teachers, police officers, politicians and the judiciary remain disproportionately white.  A Conservative Party that shows no sign of being in a position to ensure that such unfairness prevails looks less worrying than the prospect of a second-term government failing to alchemise its wishes on racial equality into results. Squandered influence is always more dangerous than none.