How to Be Idle <br /> by Tom Hodgkinson<br /> 288pp, Hamish Hamilton, £12.99   In Praise of Slow<br /> by Carl Honore<br /> 310pp, Orion, £16.99   The Play Ethic <br /> by Pat Kane<br /> 458pp, Macmillan, £12.99 Soft Power <br />by Joseph Nye <br />208pp, Public Affairs, £18.99 Status Syndrome<br /> by Michael Marmot <br />320pp, Bloomsbury, £12.99  It's that time of year. The children have started a new school year, and their parents are beginning a new work year. It's a fresh term; the transition from the holiday to the work season is upon us. And every year there is the same cancerous question: why is the acceleration in tempo and pressure as we leave those restorative holidays behind not a source of well-being and happiness? There must surely be ways of marrying work and life that are more accommodating to our humanity. Are holidays really the only time when we can find time for living at a human pace?  The quest for happiness is starting to preoccupy the national conversation more and more. The work-life balance movement, at first derided as the obsession of New Labour ministers and some trendy employers, is coming of age; more and more companies want to offer their workforces some autonomy over how they use their time and are finding that if they don't, they lose their best and brightest. Workers will go on strike to insist that they have more control over their time. A new generation of economists is inquiring into whether the century-long assumption of economics - that economic man and woman have an inbuilt motivation to want more profit, more wages and more material goods and that monetary motivation is always a reliable compass to action - is still correct. If money doesn't reliably make us happy, then economics had better remodel how it conceives of human behaviour. We might be less self-interested; maybe even concerned about our happiness in the round. And then what happens to the profit motive?   A growing number of men and women in mid-career seem ready to abandon the prospect of material wealth for a downsized life in which they are in control of how they spend their time. The interest in alternative medicine, therapies and diets mushrooms; pharmaceutical companies offer us lifestyle drugs that keep depression at bay. We want well-being. And now comes a rash of books from some accomplished journalist/commentators (Tom Hodgkinson, Carl Honore and Pat Kane), all of whom seem to be practising what they preach (damn them), urging us variously to take play seriously, to go slower and to celebrate idleness.   On top there is an American academic - Joseph Nye - arguing that how the west lives can be a source of compelling "soft power" to the rest of the world, persuading it voluntarily that because it wants to be like us it will be readier to do our bidding; and a British academic (Michael Marmot), who shows how good health, an essential component of happiness, is crucially determined by the higher your standing in the organisation for which you work and society at large,   rather than the amount of money you earn. Taken as a whole, these books at the very least suggest that something is going on.   If Nye is right, could the idler (Hodgkinson), the player (Kane) and the slowcoach (Honore) offer a better response to terrorism than shocking and awing cowed Muslim populations? Their preoccupation, freely expressed in a typical western society, is how to live well free from the injunctions of the state, church or social compulsions - more appealing that we might guess to populations in thrall to the unrelenting rhythms of religion. Of the three invocations to live differently, Kane's is the most arresting, with its appeal to celebration of a play ethic; Hodgkinson and Honore are treading well-worn paths in their appeal to be idle and slow respectively, although they do it well. Hodgkinson, in particular, glories in reminding us that idleness has a long tradition. But taking play seriously? Kane is certainly on to something fresh and insightful.   He rebels against the notion that purpose can be achieved only by the disciplines of work, and against those who argue that work is what gives meaning to our lives because it is via work that we act on the world, via work that we interact socially and via work that we achieve status. He chides the Calvinistic Gordon Brown for his view that work is the salve for every economic and social problem. For Kane the point of life is not to work and be a worker; it is to play and be a player - and thus be both a better worker and solve that happiness riddle alike. What we want is less work-life balance, more a recognition that the alpha and omega of good living is to know how to play - and to insert the play ethic into everything we do.   Play is about imagination, experimentation and being confident enough to take a chance, all in a context in which, because it's a game, nothing vital attaches to the outcome; and if we start with the notion that we are "players" and that the world will not come to an end if what we plan doesn't come off, there is much more chance of living edgily, of finding time, of building rewarding relationships and of being genuinely creative in how we live and work.   Kane argues that our language subliminally recognises the role of play: we talk about putting an idea or concept in play; a company that is the object of takeover speculation is "in play"; a politician on the up is a "player". Yet we never stop to think about why we use play in contexts that the wider work ethic would insist are the ultimate in seriousness. Kane insists that the language is pointing us in the right direction, if only we recognised it. Of course all the world's a stage, and we are merely players with our exits and entrances; the trick is to lighten up and recognise that all aspects of life are more about gaming than working. There's fun to be had in taking over a company or challenging for the leadership of a political party - and once you locate what you are doing in those terms you are readier to experiment with the unexpected or devise a winning stratagem. Moreover, our language - talking about play and players - recognises that this is what is going on.   It's a nice thesis, except that Kane doesn't know whether he is inventing a universal theory of life or merely saying play is valuable, even for those in work. He is not sure whether he wants us just to play at everything, or that to play is a better way of achieving the outcomes that we normally look to work to provide. Every trendy button is pressed, whether the role of hackers in spreading the IT gospel (particularly in Finland) to, inevitably, St Luke's advertising agency - with lots of indulgent meanderings about his own life. It's very easy to get lost.   Nor does he recognise the way in which work confers status, and thus wellbeing. Michael Marmot's important study  Status Syndrome shows that - in every culture - our happiness and health are closely related to the place we occupy in the status hierarchy, and that that the key to status is our occupation. Happy, healthy, long-lived civil servants don't play more than their peers; they just need to be one rung above them in career grades. Kane, enjoying his status as writer, thinker and provocateur, has lost sight of the fact that what motivates everyone else is just the same - and climbing up an organisation's grades or doing enviable, well-regarded work is fundamental to most people's sense of themselves. Work is where it's ultimately at. None the less you can't read his book without accepting that we all could play more while we do it.   The question is whether we could also go slower and find more time for idleness. I found Honore's and Hodgkinson's books not only entertaining, but getting under my skin. Reaching middle life - or even late middle life - with a growing sense that I need to reorder my priorities made me a receptive reader. Honore's hymn to the pleasure of allowing everything its proper time - from eating and cooking to just moving around - is well executed and persuasive; and you learn about a worldwide "Slow Movement" that seems to be gaining ground everywhere. There are slow food groups, slow sex therapists (tantrists), slow doctors, slow sports experts - and so it goes on until finally you wonder how you ever could have mixed with all those fasties.    I'm not sure, however, whether he concedes sufficiently the pleasures of doing things fast. At one stage he acknowledges wryly how quickly he was driving to make an appointment to enjoy a meal of ritualised slowness in Italy - and reproaches himself. But the paradox is that Honore could never have accumulated the impressive evidence for the case he makes without the whole fast infrastructure of modern life, from the internet to air travel. Like Kane, he falls into the trap of trying to turn an important corrective to too much speed into a philosophy of life. I enjoy the (too few) occasions when I chop vegetables, linger over a meal or just hang out; but I enjoy speed, too. There is pleasure in crossing the Atlantic in a cruise ship; but most of us opt for the 747 not from perversity, but because we value our time. Life is finite. Most of us want to die with a sense of a life well lived rather than the satisfaction that we took our time. That said, there is no doubt that we overdo speed.   And we overdo being busy. Tom Hodgkinson, founder of the Idler magazine, takes us on an indulgent (but that's his mission) tour of the satisfactions of being idle. Indeed I was so impressed by his chapter on the virtues of the nap that one sunny lunchtime I headed for the park to fall asleep in the sun - which I did, feeling gloriously guiltless and assertive about it. The directionless ramble; the joy of inhaling cigarette smoke; the pleasure of sleeping in; the anticipation of the first drink of the day - Hodgkinson knows where pleasure is to be found. The more I read, however, the more I felt that he protested too much; that we don't need citations from long-dead poets and scribes to justify napping in the sun. The point about being idle is not to work at it, surely; indeed one of the virtues of work is that it offers us something to be idle from - as well as offering us a sense of purpose. To make idleness our central purpose is to turn it into work - and then even idleness becomes infected by the work ethic. It's all, as with Kane and Honore, about proportion.   The debate about idleness, play and speed would strike any one of the billions of workers in the third world who earn no more than a couple of dollars a day as something from another planet - but one none the less to which they aspire. Joseph Nye, dean of the Kennedy School of Government, has built upon one of the themes in an earlier book - The Paradox of American Power: Why the World's Superpower Can't Go it Alone - arguing that what he   calls "soft power" is an indispensable element in contemporary diplomacy. Hard power is the coercive military strength of the 19th century; but it doesn't work in the 21st. Threats come less from competing nation states than from terrorist sub-groups; and most diplomacy these days is about persuading states voluntarily to sign a treaty or join an alliance to help us in some endeavour - to fight terrorism, say - for which they in turn have to win domestic support. And that can best be won, certainly in relations with the less developed world, if their elites and citizens alike want to join the alliance because they like their ally's values and the lifestyles it boasts. Nye cites the BBC World Service as a key element in Britain's soft power; it is a window on a universe that its listeners worldwide respect and want to emulate.   Thus, if you agree with Nye's thesis, the other authors under review are not just advocates for seeking wellbeing; they are advertisements for the way the British are trying to live, part of our soft power. Nye is excoriating about the way Bush - and by implication Blair - has undermined the west's soft power in the Middle East by their invasion of Iraq. I know the British Council, for example, feels profoundly compromised by Britain's close association with American foreign policy, and many CEOs of FTSE 100 companies are uneasy about how British companies are seen as American surrogates and fear for their long-term prospects in some key Asian and Middle Eastern markets. Soft power - and the values and lifestyles behind it - may be invisible, but it is nevertheless potent, and we sacrificed a lot of it to make common cause with US neo-conservatives who want to make America feared for its uncontestable military might.   But we can relax a little. Kane, Honore and Hodgkinson are doing their small part to help our image and limit the appeal of al-Qaida. It's a far-fetched thesis, but not so far-fetched that it can be rejected out of hand. The happier we are, the better - not just for ourselves, but as a reason to be copied rather than opposed.