Vision: The Lessons of the 20th Century for the 21st<br />by Bill Emmott<br />336pp, Allen Lane, £20 The editor of the Economist has been wrestling with what the future holds - on all our behalves. We can rest easy. There will, of course, be setbacks and alarms but essentially the future is good. America, which of course has its problems and difficulties, will underwrite and protect the advance of capitalism, which of course has its ups and downs too, but that twin combination of American hegemony and liberal capitalism that has served us well up to now (with, of course, some exceptions) will serve us well in the future - with possibly some downward interruptions to the upward march of progress. We can be paranoidly optimistic. Bill Emmott's crystal-ball gazing suffers from all the deformations of books of this type. He has no better idea of what the future holds than Gypsy Nell, and sometimes his honest recognition that the evidence which allows him to be sanguine could just as well work out very differently leaves the reader with an unsatisfactory sense of wading through acres of well-intentioned bullshit. On the one hand there are all these things that could go wrong; on the other hand they might not - usually because America and capitalism always win out in the end - so everything is ultimately for the best in this curate's egg of a world. Emmott might have written a more illuminating book if he had asked more interesting questions and applied more rigour in answering them. As he declares at the outset of his enterprise, he believes the two questions anybody curious about the world's future has to ask and answer are whether America will maintain the military and economic strength to champion peace and progress globally, through which capitalism flourishes; and whether capitalism itself is going to continue to deliver the goods. Anybody familiar with Emmott's leaders in the Economist will guess the conclusion to his questions - so this is a detective story with zero tension. Even those sympathetic to Emmott's case (and he will be surprised that I include myself, given his Manichean view of the universe about which, as a critic of present America and defender and advocate of contemporary Europe I plainly have little understanding) will feel very uncomfortable about his intellectual method. It is little more than a cook's tour of the world according to Emmott; the reader has little sense that the relevant literature has been surveyed or many primary sources talked to. In a typical passage he opines that Osama bin Laden and al-Qaida are no more than representatives of a long tradition of terror (albeit on a more extensive scale) with no chance of capturing a state from which to operate. Confronted by focused American leadership they will finally be bested, although, to protect his flank, he adds that there must be no complacency. He may be right, but his judgment would have been a great deal more impressive had it been informed by an attempt to get behind what drives Islamist terrorism, some insight into the possible secret relationships between the terror networks and some Arab states and a recognition that American leadership by itself does not guarantee the outcome we all want - a lot depends on how legitimately and skilfully that leadership is exercised. Western security forces, to the extent we know much at all about what they think, seem much less optimistic than Emmott, and some scholars of Islam worry that its cultural predisposition towards jihad and terrorism is so embedded that not even liberal democracy - again a fanciful notion in some Arab states - could remove it. In any case 21st- century terrorism, based on networks without centres and on new technologies, may not need a state base from which to exercise enormous leverage. Emmott's opinion would have much more force were it backed by more substance than musings conceived in his Wiltshire study. On one aspect of this debate, though, he is wrong. The success of the US's confrontation with terrorism depends on the framework in which it is conducted. For Emmott, however, the crucial and over-riding question, given the way he frames his book, is simply whether America will engage and sustain its engagement. The hows of the engagement are second-order issues. Emmott thinks that multilateralism would be better than unilateralism, but that while the trend in the Bush administration towards unilateralism will create "frictions" it will not upset the ultimate prospects of success. This, a judgment also made by the American right, is woefully inadequate. The war in Iraq, if not triggered by a second UN resolution and with unambiguous evidence of a material Iraqi breach in its obligations, will not be legitimate - and will thus make any subsequent peace settlement difficult, if not impossible. Without international legitimacy, a successor Iraqi regime - the country is barely governable even by Saddam - will have little or no chance of long-term survival. The world's stock markets are correctly apprehensive that we are entering a new era of possibly prolonged instability, but the banal way Emmott casts his two questions and conducts his analysis throws little light on why this should be so. The right question is not whether America will engage with the world (that is inevitable), but rather what the balance of forces is within America that will determine the character of that engagement. Emmott, a largely uncritical British proselytiser of American conservatism, is indifferent to the way America is changing under the influence of the American right. It is not a drift to unilateralism; it is a headlong charge. At one point he acknowledges and regrets that America's insistence that it will not join the international criminal court undermines the international fight against terrorism. Yet he does not think to examine why such opposition is so deeply rooted - and, if anything, growing. Nor does it create "frictions"; it undermines, as wise American commentators and analysts recognise if Emmott does not, the basis on which America can legitimately promote the peace and progress on which globalisation depends. There are two Americas: the liberal, internationalist one whose engagement with the world both Emmott and I regard as an imperative; and a highly conservative, nationalist and atavistic one that is insular, unilateralist and culturally xenophobic. That this is so, and the influence it has on the US's relationship with the rest of the world, does not change his conclusions; his ideological prism is such that America is in favour of free markets and democracy, and that is all that counts. By not marking or even understanding the fundamental divisions that are emerging in contemporary America, or acknowledging the debates about how capitalism can be configured, Emmott's analysis is rendered threadbare. He may, fair-mindedly, recognise that capitalism generates instability and inequality, but he has little time for alternative philosophies to the pure milk of free market economics that offer national communities social contracts and insist that enterprise be fairly run to embed countervailing forces. Essentially he buys the American conservative view that enterprise is about buying cheap and selling dear, motivated by a quest for lucre that should be uninhibited by regulatory constraint. Yet the building block of capitalism is the firm - a business organisation - and building and leading organisations that survive and prosper is much more sophisticated than the economics of the street market. As business leaders know, you need the active participation and support of a committed workforce to create a great business, and that in turn needs a sense of economic and social purpose other than simple profit maximisation; but the system built in America, in which workers are disposable commodities consecrated to the growth of shareholder value, makes that task harder rather than easier. The answer to the second question Emmott poses - about the sustainability of capitalism - would have been much more subtle had he thought to explore such notions, even if he disagrees with them. The American economic and social model has strengths, but to regard it as the model for the world to emulate, and all other models (notably those in Europe) as weaker because they deviate from the American model, is a grievous mistake. We need capitalism and globalisation to advance and prosper; and we need American participation in any global form of governance. To get there we will need better analysis and guidance than that offered by Gypsy Bill.