High Society<br />by Ben Elton<br />Bantam Press £16.99, pp352 Ben Elton is not a neutral in the debate about drugs. Not for him the compromises of the current Home Secretary (curiously similar to those of the imaginary Home Secretary in his book) or, for that matter,  The Observer. He wants complete legalisation of all drug use - from heroin and crack cocaine to cannabis. Anything else is deceitful and purposeless because, as the central character in  High Society - campaigning Labour MP Peter Paget - puts it, either we are or have been users ourselves or know someone who is or has been a user; we are thus law-breakers or condone law breaking and so undermine the cornerstone of social   order. If the law does not go with the grain of social reality, then it is an ass. Drug use is now so extensive that trying to draw boundaries between class A and class C drugs is futile - and what results is the devastation and hypocrisy portrayed  here. Better legalisation of all drugs, opening up the possibility of their proper regulation and of honestly confronting what they do to people. Elton's book in many ways should not succeed. His characters are one-dimensional and when he uses them to deploy the arguments for legalisation the results are gawky; a very good comedian abandoning his craft and instead lumbering into the pulpit to preach. The main plot is predictable; we know from the moment Paget's assistant admires her boss that the subsequent affair and its denouement are inevitable. The drug-saturated rock star Tommy Hanson is a cartoon cut-out and his adventures stretch credulity to the limits. Elton should take a self-denying ordinance and be more sparing in delivering sex scenes; despite his best efforts they do not work. And yet. The book is saved by its pace and verve and the author's passion for his subject. Involvement with Britain's drug laws has laid all of his characters low and Elton's portrait of Jessie, the Scottish prostitute kept in thrall to her minders by their making her dependent on heroin, shows how it is on the streets and how illegality, expense and heroin's cruel addictive quality make the bonds close to impossible for her to break. For vast swathes of the British, experimenters with illegal drugs perhaps in their youth but now lapsed into alcohol and tobacco, the current evolving compromises seem a reasonable halfway house - recognising reality but also cautious about signalling that heroin is no more problematic than coffee. This is the overstated premise at the heart of the book. There is certainly a very strong British drug economy and drug subculture but, unlike alcohol, it remains a subculture - so the comparison made with Prohibition by Peter Paget does not stand. The book would have had more tension if Elton had allowed the anti-legalisation arguments to be marshalled by someone more sympathetic than an unsatisfactory Tory Shadow Home Secretary and in the end his hero undoes himself by lying to a mendacious press about his affair rather than losing the argument on drugs. Yet as I raced to the end, I found myself applauding Elton. This is a tough subject tackled with courage and commitment. The great Victorian novelists managed to crusade and to entertain. Elton's book, despite its weaknesses, is cast in that tradition.