The Bin Ladens: The Story of a Family and its Fortune  by Steve Coll  Allen Lane £25, pp671 There is a contradiction here. Without Osama, and what he did, this family history would surely never have been written. What western publishing house cares about the growing pains of a Middle East civil engineering corporation? Yet the story of Mohamed bin Laden, his heirs and successors, is enthralling. It does not explain 9/11, nor al-Qaeda, but it explains a great deal about the tentacles that run from Riyadh to touch a wider world, tentacles of corruption, ambition, hedonism and dislocation. In a curious way, it is essentially American. A century ago, a Yemeni peasant farmer borrowed an ox to plough his patch. But the ox died and its owner wanted restitution, so the farmer had to flee miles from his homeland. He married, began to raise a family, then died, leaving two sons, Mohamed and Abdullah. Mohamed, the elder, found work on building sites. He was skilled, organised, meticulous. People trusted and promoted him; in the Thirties, he founded his own company, where one thing went with another. One thing was the house of Saud and its ruler, Abdul Aziz. The other was oil. Great gushers of cash poured from beneath the desert. Abdul Aziz was an absolute monarch determined to build temples, roads, palaces. So he called for Mohamed bin Laden, the master builder. It was a classic saga in the American style, of impoverished immigrants turned into millionaires. At the end of this tale it's 13 September 2001. America is stunned and vengeful. The name Bin Laden seems like a curse. Prince Bandar, the Saudi ambassador in Washington, hires a Boeing 727 to thread its way across the States, picking up the Bin Laden family - students, entrepreneurs, lawyers, wives, kids - to get them to Saudi before they come to harm. Osama may have declared war on the States, but his kith and kin love the place. They don't want to go. The US is their home. In between the death of the ox and the death of belief in a peaceful, post-communist world, the royal family and the family that does its building move in parallel. Abdul Aziz is a holy man and unholy fornicator. By 1930, he claimed 235 or so wives, married and divorced four at a time. He aimed to extend his power by procreation and thus keep it in the family. Mohamed bin Laden was the same. He managed 22 wives and 53 children. In 1957 alone, the year Osama was born, by way of a fleeting marriage to a 15-year-old Syrian girl, he was the father of six other children, two daughters and four more sons. So pause here for a moment: what kind of true 'family life' does such compulsive copulation produce? It may be habit-forming from generation to generation: Osama has racked up at least five wives and 22 kids. But what does it do to the psyche? Dynastically, more means more - more chance that one out of scores of sons will be capable of carrying the business forward. Thus, when Mohamed dies in a plane crash, his son Salem has been educated well enough at a minor English boarding school to take charge. He 'believes in his Learjet, his MU-2 and his jeans and guitar and harmonica,' says a Lebanese chum. The empire grows, the routes to homes in Florida are open wide. The Bin Ladens are global before Salem dies young, in another plane crash. But here's brother Bakr, more prudent, more concerned about image, a talent to take the helm. For as long as the House of Saud survives, there is money and booze and a wife in every port, with the American ambassador dancing attendance and the Bush family laying out a Kennebunkport welcome mat. It's a heady ride and a racy read in Harold Robbins mode. This is how Saudi Arabia was built and these are the foundations it rests on. No wonder Salem began to move millions overseas when the House of Saud rocked. No wonder that today, under Bakr's stewardship, the Bin Laden brand has a global reach, into jeans as well as bricks and mortar. But does even Steve Coll, a shrewd Washington Post journalist, understand how Osama bin Laden emerged from this brew? Only mistily, perhaps. Osama was part of the family business, too. Salem left him $9m or so. He was family bagman and House of Saud middle man in Peshawar as the Afghan war against the Soviets gathered momentum. He was a good fundraiser with charisma and contacts. Yet how did that relatively minor family apparatchik turn into a monster of destruction? You can trace his zealotry back to the gym master from the Muslim Brotherhood who taught him in Jeddah. You can sense the alienation of the excluded. You can also discern the restlessness of midlife crisis as he develops his creed and targets the Americans who underpin his family and wealth. But he's not much of an intellectual; he's not a guerrilla fighter in the badlands of west Pakistan now; he seems lonely and somewhat bemused. Osama bin Laden is the cuckoo who fell out of a nest of gold lined with mink. If you want to know what comes next, look back to Saudi Arabia and ask yourself how long can this state endure? The enemies of our enemy can be intrinsic enemies, too.