Who Runs Britain? by Robert Peston  Hodder &amp; Stoughton £20, pp360 The title question is rhetorical, without a definitive answer. Apparently, Gordon Brown doesn't run Britain. Like Tony Blair before him, he truckles to the global super-rich. His bizarre New Labour rule is 'that if you don't want to pay tax, be impoverished or obscenely wealthy,' Peston notes sourly. But do a few globetrotting billionaires really make us, and our elected leaders, dance like puppets on some golden string? Not in ways you can quite pin down. Their main threat, the one that gets Downing Street oddly anxious, is that they'll push off to some other fiscal heaven and leave us in the lurch, which would be unpleasant if they paid their full tax whack in the first place. But they don't. Peston doesn't do angry. His BBC business editor berth, not to mention all those calm years on the Financial Times, keeps wrath well under wraps. But as he surveys a City landscape of hedge funds, private-equity capitalists and cheap cash stacked tower-block high, he wonders whatever became of the dour son of the manse who frowned over greed and railed against avarice. Under 10 years of Brown's stewardship, 'the maximum spoils have gone to those at the very apex of the income and wealth league tables; a new plutocracy has been born'. Why? Heaven alone knows. And now, as the rivers of cash start to run dry, that mystery will surely be probed time and again. The best sections in this fluent, incredibly up-to-the-minute look at Britain in the first months of 2008, don't explore theories of extremes and extremely depressing consequences, though. Peston, in relaxed, conversational style, is a great teaching and travelling companion along the highways of finance. Can't tell your private-equity gambit from your hedge-fund finagle? Unsure what happened to the pension upon which you were relying? Here's the clearest, most erudite explanation around. And it's all so damned easy to pull off, money for jam when the banks take the strain, because they're too dumb to do due risk diligence, and when the Treasury gets every intervention wrong, because it seems to have become terminally stupid. Want to build more hospitals and schools? No: we taxpayers effectively subsidise Debenhams or the AA as they jump through private equity's hoops to the tune of many lost tax millions, then, for years, reward the suits who put the deals together with a 10 per cent capital gains windfall. But, in its middle reaches, you can feel Peston's loyalties wandering. He ought to be putting the boot into Damon Buffini, the chairman of Permira, Britain's only 'world-class' private-equity company, but Buffini is black, with a single mum, born on a Midlands council estate, an Arsenal fan and he's too interesting to be a cypher for hate. Like Ronnie Cohen, founder of Apax and creator of businesses in Palestinian territories, he is a three-dimensional character. Whereupon, in the constant company of Philip Green, Stuart Rose of M&amp;S and Allan Leighton, we move into chapters full of pulsating tales in which the super-rich earn their corn by being smarter, shrewder and quicker off the mark than the rest of us. In short, Peston finds himself beached somewhere between condemnation and admiration. If Philip Green of BHS and Topshop ran Britain, we'd have some fabulous parties and great tales to tell. At which point you begin to ask the next, more intriguing question: how much does super wealth matter? Peston believes that a Britain divided between hugely rich and pretty poor, between equity-intensive London and public-service North, is a country that may come apart at the seams. The bingeing of the hedge-fund few brings us 'overpriced art and control of a football club' - but nothing of worth or cohesion. New Labour's legacy may be a land where billions in lost taxes also means lost hope and opportunity. Yet - golly! - it's all very fascinating while it lasts, he seems to mutter round the side. And where, politically, is the resentment of fantastic riches dubiously accumulated? Do Chelsea fans wave their fists at Abramovich - or Ashley Cole (netting more in a week than Derek Conway's expenses for a year)? Does anyone but the Daily Mail care how much Jonathan Ross takes home? Is anybody but Amanda Platell volunteering to knit cashmere socks by the guillotine? No. Like America, we seem to have bought the whole celebrity culture package. We gawp admiringly at the rich and famous. We switch on TV lists of 'the world's top billionaire heiresses'. We aren't into rage or envy. We inhabit a landscape where income gaps don't seem to matter any more. We are almost certainly wrong, fuelling our own demise. But the case for truly caring - for concern about who should run Britain - needs to be made afresh, with passion. Peston has only begun a great, engaging job here. He's started; now he must finish.