Flat Earth News  by Nick Davies<br /> 
408pp, Chatto &amp; Windus, &pound;17.99 At one point in this vibrant tirade against the sins of modern journalism, Nick Davies ponders the possibility of a concerted Fleet Street plot to delude and traduce - then settles for something more mundane: "The whole thing is much crazier than that. It is more like watching a mouse being thrown into a washing machine." There's no conspiracy here, he laments, "it's just a mess." And that, ultimately, is the trouble with Flat Earth News, too. You can, both entertainingly and dismayingly, produce a formidable indictment sheet of bad things getting worse, debacles to make most journalists cringe - and he does. Too many chain papers slicing costs with share price survival in mind. Too much recycling of flimsy news copy across too many platforms. Too many corners cut, too much sloth and dishonesty; too many governments peddling lies; too many public relations merchants, whispering spooks, easy hand-outs, talentless celebrities, glib excuses. Too much damned time pressure demanding extra helpings of "churnalism" from "the news factory". And that's just for starters. If Davies were writing a book about parallel problems in British medicine, the first chapter would probably conjoin doctors Shipman and Crippen. His journey, as he professes at the start, may be all about truth, honesty and the "profession" he loves. But as we discover, soon afterwards, low blows and dodgy statistics are also a part of the business all journalists really belong to - which, from Thomas Nashe to William Hone to (well ...) Kelvin MacKenzie, is a trade, and a rough one, at that. Is there a theme to bind such horrors together? Davies believes that, once upon a time, the press enjoyed a golden age. He can't quite put a date to it: perhaps somewhere 1960-ish, when George Glenton of the News Chronicle wrote his crime correspondent's memoirs: perhaps the 70s when Harry Evans's Sunday Times was in full bloom: perhaps somewhere indeterminate before or between the twin devils of Murdoch and Maxwell. But in any case, things ain't what they used to be. Then (whenever then was) journalists had time to check agency copy, make their own calls, go out and order coffee; time to think. Now all that's gone to hell on a turbo-charged handcart. It's the constant swirl of 24/7 (as coincidentally recently denounced by Alastair Campbell in his Cudlipp lecture) that brings us down. Say one little word - McCann - and blush like Paxman talking pants. So, allegedly, Fleet Street manning, even on the Guardian, Times and Telegraph (Davies's prime targets), has sunk "slightly below" pre-Wapping levels, his research team from Cardiff University tell him, but the editorial space to be filled has swelled three times over. Result: rush, slop and reliance on Press Association copy (shrinking itself) that leaves only 12% of the tales you read here daily free from secondhand taint, thus dooming most reporters to double as mere rewrite toilers. But try crunching such numbers and indigestion follows. When I stopped editing this paper in 1995, the editorial staff was 260 or so. Today, on the most slimline reckoning (excluding internet-only staffing) it's 430. The Times has risen to about 450 over the past 10 years, adding 100 journalists. And when you look down at the Telegraph's vast new auditorium of a newsroom, you think of the Emirates Stadium. Fewer people? No: that's wrong. And more space to fill? Actually, the same Cardiff calculators claim that the Guardian only carries 20 UK stories a day, and the Times 24. From staffs of 400-plus, that doesn't sound exactly overstretched. The difficulty, alas, is that Davies hasn't done the basic investigative things here that distinguish his fine, award-garlanded work on education, health and poverty. Maybe he thought he didn't need to understand what makes journalism tick because, well, he was a journalist himself, wasn't he? But, in fact, he doesn't seem to comprehend the difference between the American and British newspaper markets, the change in commuting and demographic patterns that is bringing evening papers low, the impact of the net or the pressure on editors to make enough money to let brilliant correspondents (such as Davies) tackle one ripe subject at a time, at a leisurely, stone-turning pace. Did I, joining my first big regional paper in 1960, walk into a land of milk and honey? No: the first job there was cutting stories from the local morning paper and rewriting the first paragraph or two to fill up the local evening's earliest edition. (And the second job was writing a 950-word leader column before going through after tea and doing a full sub-editing shift). The "golden age" of Beaverbrook, union disputes stopping the presses, and regional mini-barons intervening to keep their Rotary Club chums out of the headlines? It is a dream and a confection. It is also chock-full of self-deception. Saint Nick begins with that "defining value of honesty". He hates the pack in full, brain-dead cry. He despises the facile cop-out of "un-named sources". But turn a few chapters further on, and Old Nick scatters page after page with quotes from anonymous chaps slagging off their editors or proprietors. The chapter on the Observer, which has caused a little churn of its own along Farringdon Road, is full of cop-out clauses - "there are those in the office who believe that ..." - and so notably short on attested fact that PA would bin it without a second thought. You can't escape the lordly contempt that Davies seems to feel for Roger Alton, the then editor of the Observer, and his political editor, Kamal Ahmed. And you can't miss the poison in the prose, either. What's it all about? Heaven knows. Davies doesn't agree with the Observer's leader line on Iraq, and nor do I as a matter of fact. But the mush of hindsight, No 10 briefings that might or might not have mattered and dissident CIA leakers two removes down the line aren't particularly compelling - and weird animuses keep poking through the skin of his prose like broken bones. He can't even tell when Alton is joking. This isn't the reporter as unbiased crusader, meticulously assembling his case. It's up close and personal. And what, for that matter, does Davies think of his Fleet Street investigative rivals? Barry Penrose is "famously slippery". "Some" think David Leppard of the Sunday Times a "ruthless charlatan". David Leigh, the doyen of this parish, has, like the typical reporter as described by Nick Tomalin, "a plausible manner, a little literary ability and a rat-like cunning". David Rose of the Observer, perhaps his closest competitor, is "fatally open to manipulation" because he "has all of the self-confidence of great reporters but less of the judgment". Goodness, how very unexpected ... From the Last Supper to a Private Eye lunch in 200 pages. Let's not kid ourselves, or anyone else, here. It would be utterly wrong to brush away all of the criticisms (and vituperation). The chapter on the supposed Bin Laden ally Abu Musab al-Zarqawi and Iraq propaganda is terrific. So is the section that deals unsparingly with bugging, tapping and monstrous hypocrisy. There's bags of useful material to cut out and keep, plenty of reasons to pause for thought and hang heads in shame. But, rather too quickly, the tone grows shrill and devoid of humour. My sources, right: everyone else's, wrong. It is a mix that leaves too much out (just like those Daily Mail "exclusives" he despises so much). "I am taking a snapshot of a cancer," he says grandiosely at the close. "But I fear the illness is terminal." Well, perhaps ... though the final, unthinking quote from Joseph Pulitzer reminds us that Rupert Murdoch is a meek little angel compared to that wild man of the New York World - and that grumpy old golden ageists need to keep their history books close by. One inescapable point about journalism is that, base or lofty, ruthless or idealistic, it is a mess, and always has been. That shouldn't stop us from trying to clean it up point by point, problem by problem. We can't afford not to be serious about our serious trade. But nor - like rather too many tremulous tradesmen - should we wallow in a froth of self-loathing that blots out the good and the necessary and the essential, too. Put that damned mouse back in the washing machine and get back to work, 24/7.