The Mighty Wurlitzer: How the CIA Played America by Hugh Wilford  Harvard University Press £18.95, pp342 It was a small, West Coast magazine and a very big scoop. Much of American public life, Ramparts reported some 41 years ago, had become a front for the Central Intelligence Agency. The United States and the world beyond it were littered with subsidised, sham organisations that all played the same mighty anthem when Frank Wisner and his successors at the Office for Policy Co-Ordination pressed a button. Trade unions, campuses, artists, Catholics, women, Hollywood tycoons, journalists ... they all danced to a spymaster's tune. Whereupon the New York Times and other mainstream papers joined in the expos&eacute; and the Wurlitzer short-circuited. Within a few months, the entire apparatus of propaganda deception had imploded. Two deep questions - one explicit, the other elusively implicit - arise from Hugh Wilford's elegantly written, diligently researched examination of the CIA's glory days. First, and quite unexpectedly: how did Allen Dulles's 'company' control the instruments of deception it had built? Second, and still more unexpectedly: did any of it add up to more than a little penny whistling? Readers of Wilford's first essay in this area (The CIA, the British Left and the Cold War) will know that the history professor from Long Beach University trades in cool judgment, not tub thumping. He's a master of context and nuance. He finds no house room for overarching theories. Thus, the luminaries who did the agency's bidding did not, for the most part, have to be browbeaten into collaboration. Like Joe Alsop, the syndicated newspaper columnist, and his brother Stewart, they were true believers to begin with. They bought the thesis first eloquently outlined by the great guru of postwar diplomacy, George Kennan. They saw the USSR as a dangerous adversary steeped in dirty trickery and phoney associations designed to delude gullible liberals. They didn't get mad, though; they just played the same game. They were joiners and participants by natural inclination; they thought it their duty to chip in and help Uncle Sam (which also meant helping many of their old university and country club pals). This wasn't, in short, some close-knit, top-down conspiracy, but rather positive patriotism as practised by concerned citizens. It concealed no guilty secrets nor, in their eyes, amounted to doing anything wrong. Gloria Steinem, for one, never thought about apologising when her membership came to light. 'In my experience, the agency was completely different from its image; it was liberal, non-violent and honourable,' she said. And, since that was the case, there was scant inclination to treat orders as orders. If you were a bigwig in the unions who didn't like being told what to do, you damned well argued back. Front organisations for democratic dialogue and disjointed debate? Not exactly, but there was nothing subservient or overtly sinister here. And then Ramparts changed everything or, perhaps, picked up on the changes that the Bay of Pigs and Vietnam had brought. Suddenly, it was rather harder to sort the good guys from the bad guys and reverence for the CIA had turned to edgy anxiety. The fronts began to seethe with the debate that had once been their recruiting strength. Wisner's successor at the OPC, Tom Braden, who had by this point left the CIA, blew much of the gaffe himself with an astonishing series of revelations in the Saturday Evening Post. Perhaps the agency had seen the writing on the wall and was engineering its own destruction? In any case, the Wurlitzer was turned into scrap metal within months of what one official historian described as 'one of the worst operational catastrophes in CIA history'. At this point, many of the witting cowered in chastened wrath and most of the unwitting who had worked alongside them wallowed in furious denunciation. Right-wing organisations railed at the CIA for funding left-wing fronts, not them. Newspapers like the New York Times, even though it had had a secret agreement with the agency to employ at least 10 agents as reporters or clerks in its foreign bureaux, assumed irate attack mode. Shame and loathing replaced patriotic pride in a trice. The whole enterprise folded back to front and those elusive questions of power and reality became inescapable. The trouble with secret agencies is that they're never open to evaluation. We're stuck with taking them - and paying for them - on terms they dictate. The Wurlitzer must be mighty because they tell us so. But then it's spook nonsense as usual. Plant a man in Paramount Studios and get him to censor a gag about manhandling Muslim women from a Jerry Lewis-Dean Martin farce because it threatened 'potentially disastrous results in the Muslim world'. Back an unwitting Halas and Batchelor to make Animal Farm because Orwell really socks it to the Reds, doesn't he? Write a memo noting that 'women are now a very important factor in nation-building' and fund a committee of women to plan over coffee mornings. Fund directors who want more money and artists who'll do anything for money. Burn fingers time and again on the Partisan Review, then do the same on Encounter, The evidence covers a swirl of constant, exhausting activity, but, significantly when you look hard, it does not demonstrate much in the way of hearts and minds massively moved. To the contrary, as Kennan wanly concluded at the end, stuff of this kind 'is not in the nature' of America. The fronts that Wisner built were more errors than terrors, shrill tunes on that tin whistle - which Hugh Wilford plays with sentient skill.