Cecil B DeMille and the Golden Calf<br />by Simon Louvish<br />(Faber) £25, pp400 It is November 1954 and Colonel Nasser has just seized power. So what, pray, are substantial sections of the Egyptian army doing now? Limbering up for Suez defensive duty? No, they're out in the Sinai desert driving chariots, the Pharaoh's faithful minions waiting for the Red Sea to part. Cecil B DeMille is here filming The Ten Commandments. Torrents of dollars flow into the colonel's new socialist coffers (though special marine effects are reserved for a Paramount studio tank back in LA). Maybe 30,000 extras fill the screen as Moses Heston, all jutting jaw and rippling pecs, leads the Exodus. If this is the great Cecil's last movie, then it's a masterpiece of hokum. And the master himself is out and about preaching most of those commandments from the heart (except the one about not committing adultery). You couldn't make it up. Indeed, only DeMille and assorted scriptwriters, some of them part of his honorary harem, would think of making it up. We do not, perhaps, manufacture moguls such as Cecil Blount DeMille any more. Only Spielberg, directing, producing, running his own little empire, comes close. Almost half a century after his death, DeMille's name is shorthand for spectacle, heaving bosoms and epic excess. He made more than 80 movies, start to finish, and almost all of them coined a profit. What more could anyone ask? Surely, a little shrewd critical assessment to mix with the hype, and Simon Louvish supplies exactly that, playing scholar as diligently as he tours the gossip circuit. He hasn't seen everything DeMille churned out after The Squaw Man in 1914, because too much of that is lost and probably gone forever, but he's seen everything there is left to see, especially from the early days when he directed 11 pictures in 1914 plus 14 in 1915, and he knows the artistry as well as the effort involved. There were only three directors who mattered in those early, tumultuous days - DW Griffith, Erich von Stroheim and DeMille - and DeMille wholly earned his place up there with the other legends. He might have come from a family of playwrights - dad, mum, brother William - but he didn't have their talent for the theatre. What he did have was a sense of adventure and inexhaustible energy. He went west to Hollywood almost by accident with his friend, Jesse Lasky. He stayed to dominate it with cowboys and Indians, worlds at war, biblical excursions, even social comedy. He might have helped shape the stereotype of a movie tycoon, but he was not stereotypical. He was a snarler, a driver, a monstrous ego, but he looked after a devoted repertory company of collaborators and mistresses until the day he died. He was a family man in thrall to his wife Constance and children both conceived and adopted, but he might have invented Californication inside his Culver City redoubt. He certainly invented celebrity chat shows (on radio). There's a lot to dislike about DeMille. His rages could part the Red Sea. As he aged, he drifted further and further right, laying out the red carpet for Joe McCarthy. He made film after film about early Judaism, but never seemed to cast an actual Jew in any of them. Sometimes, the sanctimony of his sub-biblical neoconservatism is choking. But he is also the embodiment of early Hollywood: daring, ambitious, crude and cultured, part monster, part commercial genius. Louvish does him proud and, in particular, rediscovers him as a giant of the silent era. Adding words couldn't kill his talent while he remembered how to fill a screen. How would he fare today as epic supplants epic? Probably not as well as he fared in the years before computers took over the action. DeMille didn't like fakery. His kitchen sinks were real. He believed in delivering the ultimate goods. But his stunning spectacles are still the ones we remember. Perhaps we should have let him invade Suez for us.