Borrowed Time<br/>by Roy Hattersley<br/>Little, Brown £20, pp454 Draw up a list of the best 20th-century Prime Ministers we never had and Roy Hattersley is bound to be somewhere near the top. He was - and remains - a political heavyweight. Three years in some long-ago cabinet looking after prices and consumer protection seems poor reward for such talent. But Hattersley has made a far better rewarded second career for himself as writer. Borrowed Time is his 19th appearance between hard covers. This companion to his earlier book, The Edwardians, is a series of essays on the major events and social changes in Britain between the wars. It begins with the unfair peace of 1918, enforced by squabbling, short-term leaders; it ends with an inevitable lurch back into global conflict 21 years later. We had just two decades without carnage. How did we use them? We founded the BBC, placed the cinema above even football as our favourite entertainment. We watched Beaverbrook and Rothermere compete for power in ways that would leave Rupert Murdoch gasping. We heard a gentleman English cricket captain order his players to bowl high at Aussie bodies. Here are some of the many things that didn't reach a full stop in 1939; trends, innovations and rivalries that touch us still. Hattersley loves all sport and most art just as much as he loves social justice. He writes about them with the bounce of true enthusiasm. Maybe you remember Gordon Richards and Gracie Fields? They're here, along with Amy Johnson and JB Priestley. Their comings and goings are, in a way, the staff and stuff of life. Part-nostalgia, part-primer for new generations, they're the heart of this book. But a politician has to write about politics, too, and here the essay technique is rather less helpful. It worked well enough for The Edwardians because, in a way, nothing much happened through an era when Balfour could take extended Highland holidays away from Number 10 in houses without a phone. But the churn of Lloyd George, Baldwin, Bonar Law and Ramsay MacDonald is too confusing to serve out separately, especially jogging back and forth in time from chapter to chapter. A light reader won't follow the plot, a heavy student will want much more and too few connections are made. Hattersley is wonderfully placed to make those connections. He could, implicitly and explicitly, link the general strike to the miners' strike, set AJ Cook alongside Arthur Scargill. ('Cook was an orator, not a negotiator: nor was he a realist'). He could take the abdication crisis and run it through the wringer of our modern monarchy. (The Prince of Wales thought his father 'stuffy, boring and impossible to please'). He could give us more Attlee plus continuing Labour tradition and rather less of Herbert Morrison's squirmings. He could find a little John Major in Neville Chamberlain and entertain by illumination. But, rather disappointingly, he attempts no such adventures within a formula. Borrowed Time is also frozen in time so far as political resonances go. Perhaps Hattersley feels that compare and contrast isn't quite proper history; perhaps he would need a theme too broad for essay bites. Or perhaps his politics, like our politics, exists in a different time capsule of experiences. The names of many of the more minor ministers who pass through these pages seem deeply lost in irrelevance now. Secretary of State for Prices and Consumer Protection? Roy Sydney George Hattersley. You mean that compulsive, prolific, exceptional chronicler of time when the Westminster music stopped? You mean you remember what he did next?