More Time for Politics: Diaries 2001-2007 by Tony Benn  Hutchinson £20, pp400 It's a Saturday morning in 2002 and Tony Benn's phone rings. Michael Foot is hacked off because Benn's sold his last volume of diaries to the Mail. 'Well, at least I didn't go to Australia at the expense of Rupert Murdoch,' our hero rasps back. 'Boy, was he angry! And I thought, bloody hell, that man joined in the witch-hunt of the left with the full support of all the right-wing papers ...' When, months later, Benn goes to Foot's big birthday party, he marks his old leader's encroaching age with something near relish. 'He was sitting all the time. His head was shaking about, as it does. He highlighted his support for the war in Yugoslavia, which I thought strange. But still, he is 90.' All of which serves as a useful reminder of bad times a quarter of a century past when brotherhood in the Labour party seemed best defined as a pilot episode for The Sopranos and the man formerly known as Anthony Wedgwood Benn was hate-figure-in-chief, reviled for shredding the last vestiges of unity before Mrs Thatcher swept them away. He's morphed into something quite different now: he gives 'big hugs' to Natasha Kaplinsky, Saffron Burrows and sundry visitors who become friends. He's chummy with Cherie. He's full of the ailments and snoozes of incipient exhaustion, but these make him appear a softer, more vulnerable fellow: earnest, eloquent, principled because these days he never need compromise. He grieves most movingly for the love of his life who died before him. The widower stays in the same big Notting Hill house, surrounded by the clobber of a long, happy marriage and struggling with a leaking roof. But he still sets himself an infernal pace: four books a year, newspaper columns, TV shows, platform speech after speech. He does rehearsed impromptu on nightly demand, long before David Cameron thought of it. He travels Britain relentlessly, a driven man who fears that the music might stop. You may glimpse Benn with puffing pipe hanging out of train windows from Crewe to Cornwall. And if there's nothing much doing on the travel front, then his chum Speaker Martin has given him a free pass to the Palace of Westminster, so he can sit in the Peers' Gallery or the Commons tea room and feel that, after 50 years, the most wonderful working men's club in London still looks after honorary life members. Are these diaries, like the six books before them, entirely honest? Of course not or, at least, not exactly. His loathing for Tony Blair fills page after page. Blair's a dictator, an autocrat. He reduced national executive meetings to farce and cabinet meetings to 20 minutes. Yet when the hated one offers Benn's son, Hilary, repeated promotions, there's scant hint of gratitude or reappraisal. Indeed, Hilary is given an easy ride on the principles front. He's allowed to say what he likes about Iraq or anything else without a word of paternal remonstration, because he's doing what's necessary and Dad is touchingly proud of his achievements. But such understanding never extends beyond the family circle. It is almost as though winning elections time after time were some mortal sin, as though the compromises needed for any change stick in a gullet of unrelenting hostility. It is a compelling, often rollicking read. And some of the points, like his passionate fears for the carnage of war in Iraq, are savagely well-argued. He didn't waft off to see Saddam on some kind of ego trip. He went because he thought he might help stop something terrible and when Saddam told him that there were no weapons of mass destruction, who now can say that he lied? Events and amazing energy have kept him going beyond the point 'where your main function is to do obituaries of people you know'. Against all odds, he's the nearest thing British politics has to a national treasure. But always keep your defences handy when he ventures too near. Most of the hostility of 25 years ago is clearly pointless and gone. His affection for his family - and theirs for him - speaks of a humanity his old enemies never acknowledged. Yet you can't fill a year's diary entries, let alone 50 years' worth, by just being 'nice'. Tony Benn was a player; he remains a player; and if you saw him popping up on TV the other day, wondering if he could stand for Parliament again at 82, you know he'll carry on playing until the day somebody else has to write the obituaries. Big hugs, but eyes wide open, too.