The Autobiography of the Queen<br />by Emma Tennant <br />222pp, Bliss Books, &pound;9.99 The Uncommon Reader<br />by Alan Bennett <br />124pp, Profile, &pound;10.99 Even for the Queen, who is used to compliments, this has been a marvellous year for tributes. Vogue puts her in its list of the top 50 glamorous women. The Archbishop of Canterbury admires her "creative faithfulness to a task" (60 years of marriage). So does the poet laureate: "the years stacked up". Dame Helen Mirren professes herself "a queenist". And from the world of letters: two new royal fantasies, published within months of each other. Admittedly, she is made to look rather a fool in both; Bennett depicts the Queen as ignorant and thick-skinned (until she is redeemed by reading), and Tennant strips her of all dignity, but it seems unlikely either author would have gone to the trouble if the Queen did not continue, in reality, as unknowable and as uncontaminated by the world outside the palace as she was on the day of her coronation. Many less awe-inspiring, constitutionally marginalised monarchs probably dream of being lampooned by such high-class satirists. Like the Stephen Frears film in which the Queen is seen, with the help of Tony Blair and a passing stag, to surrender to the emotional literacy of the crowd, the novels show, in their way, that we care. Who would bother to show the Dutch royals learning to feel? They probably do little else. The Queen, Tennant has noticed, really does inhabit a world so remote that her sudden exposure to our own would lead to many a fascinating contrast. "The Queen had never been shut out of a place before," she points out, after her version of the monarch is excluded from somewhere. "Had she wished it, she could visit every stately home in Great Britain and be accorded the most rapturous and respectful welcome. High-security prisons, the inner enclosures at the most exclusive race courses, four-star restaurants with waiting lists of several years would all fling open their doors for her." Wisely, perhaps, she makes no mention of Harrods. But Tennant could be right in thinking that the Queen does not know how to work anything, other than horses. And cars, perhaps, since she trained as mechanic in the war. We duly witness the Queen's struggle with her first-ever suitcase on wheels: plainly, Tennant believes her seclusion from the world to have been long enough to have rendered her a halfwit. "'Does one simply pull it down the stairs?' she asked - but for once, there was no one there to reply." The suitcase is needed because, for reasons too silly to go into, Tennant's Queen has decided to run away, secretly, to St Lucia, where she has bought a villa, off plan. It has not, oh dear, been built, allowing Tennant to devise all kinds of humiliations for an unappealing simpleton who has never learned to lock doors, look after her own things, or take any of the protective measures that would be adopted by the most insignificant of her millions of subjects. If this fable demonstrates, with relentless clarity, that the effect of a privileged royal life can be every bit as damaging, where life-skills are concerned, as a poor one, the glee with which Tennant swiftly reduces the Queen to a batty old fool in flip-flops is mystifying. Perhaps it is meant to be funny. One might well, if one were the Queen, prefer Bennett's fantasy, which features many welcome, courteously signposted jokes about Queens and queens, queens and smut, queens and class: "good novels seldom came as well-connected as this", his Queen concedes, confronted with a copy of Love in a Cold Climate. She is not just repressed and snobbish; Bennett's comedy also requires her to be so untutored, prior to befriending a well-read gay servant called Norman, that she can embark, with impartial interest, on biographies of Lauren Bacall and of Sylvia Plath - the first wife of her late poet laureate. "That the Queen could readily switch from showbiz autobiography to the last days of a suicidal poet might seem both incongruous and wanting in perception," writes the kindly Bennett. "But, certainly in her early days, to her all books were the same and, as with her subjects, she felt a duty to approach them without prejudice." This simplicity enables the Queen, even after she finds "a truly human side" through her reading, to remain a useful idiot savant. All through, it is easier to imagine her talking in Bennett's Piglet voice, than in authentic Mirren. "Books are wonderful, aren't they?" she tells a lunch companion, let us call him Pooh. He agrees. "At the risk of sounding like a piece of steak," she says, "they tenderise one." If this were true, literary people would surely be the wisest, loveliest people around. If only. Because the Queen is the Queen, no one in Bennett's story has the authority to challenge her epigrams about the transformative power of books with evidence of their regrettable limitations in this respect. If books stop a person being snobbish, for instance, what does one make of Virginia Woolf? And what is her position on bad books? We might know, if young Norman had recommended Mein Kampf, by a family friend. Or, for that matter, Emma Tennant's latest. Bennett's is such a divine little book, with its patterned end-papers and gold coronet, that it is sure to find its way, this Christmas, into the stockings of many reluctant readers, who may even, festive telly being what it is, discover that the intellectual's contempt for the non-reader has rarely been so seductively expressed. But they have only to emulate the Queen's evolution, following Norman/Bennett's course-work, into a lovely person and proficient literary tease to realise that The Uncommon Reader doubles as a charming, extended compliment to anyone with the same hobby. Aren't we great! &middot; To order The Autobiography of the Queen for &pound;9.99 or The Uncommon Reader for &pound;9.99, both with free UK p&amp;p, call Guardian book service on 0870 836 0875 or go to guardian.co.uk/bookshop