Mary Archer: For Richer, For Poorer<br /> by Margaret Crick<br /> 352pp, Simon &amp;amp;amp;amp; Schuster, &pound;17.99<br /> For some time now, Mary Archer's reputation has been on the whiffy side. If there was once, in the era of her fragrance, a possibility that this sanctimonious academic was quite as much a victim of her husband Jeffrey Archer's misdeeds as the prostitute Monica Coghlan and the many other people he has deceived, threatened or paid off, it has since been thoroughly extinguished by her subsequent adventures as an Anglia director, Lloyd's council member, merciless litigant and, above all, as champion of the Old Vicarage One. Anyone who can insist, as Mary Archer still does, that her husband did not deserve his prison sentence for the "trivial" crime of perverting justice is either dim or morally flawed, or, I suppose, in the pay of Jeffrey Archer. And the choirmistress Mary Archer is certainly not dim. Whiffiness, as Jeffrey Archer demonstrated for very many years, is no barrier to preferment, and his wife continues to prosper in public life. Although her work in solar energy is not, one gathers from Margaret Crick's biography, of a quality to put her in the first rank of scientists, Mrs Archer has nonetheless collected a number of prominent positions on boards and bodies, trusts and charities that would be quite amazing, were it not in the nature of such activities to be insupportably boring. Although it may be disagreeable for fellow worthies on, for instance, the board of Addenbrooke's NHS Trust, to endure sustained contact with a person who must be irreparably grubbied by her years as Jeffrey Archer's helpmeet, there is no evidence from Crick (who certainly looked hard for it) that the female Archer has been anything other than efficient and diligent in her public duties. And for all one knows, Lady Archer, who was heard not long ago hissing "bitch" at her former secretary in the high court, may, in this world of status-seeking busybodies, pass for a person of untrammelled integrity. What preoccupies Crick is her clever subject's loyalty to that buffoon, philanderer and fraud, Jeffrey. "Does she know about everything and simply accept it? Does she excuse Jeffrey's unacceptable behaviour because she feels he has many redeeming features?" Crick asks. "Or is she a very strong wife who values loyalty and her marriage vows very highly?" Would it really add to the sum of human knowledge if Mary told us the answer? Of course, Crick thinks so, worrying away at the question for well over 300 well-upholstered pages, until she is forced, in the final chapter, to admit that Mary remains "an enigma ... largely because she stays married to Jeffrey". In putting such emphasis on this mystery, Crick does herself a disservice, for her main achievement is to highlight, as never before, the similarities between the Archers. Mary may be a mistress of the periodic table who reeks of moral certitude, but she is also a flagrant exhibitionist who will grab any opportunity to warble and prance in front of an audience and who takes obvious delight in the attention and wealth, property and parties, geegaws and dressing-up opportunities that have been conferred on her through her husband's efforts. A career in solar energy does not buy country vicarages, penthouses and art collections. As with Cherie Blair, with whom she also has quite a bit in common, it is a habit of Archer's to alternate between showing off and asserting her right to privacy, and she seems to have gone to some trouble to thwart Crick in her research. While one fully understands Crick's irritation, Archer's resistance is also comprehensible. For there is, obviously, a good deal of difference between offering your own, disingenuous confessions and having them extracted from you willy-nilly by a third, probably unsympathetic party. Coming from the wife of Michael Crick, the author of a brilliant and brave expos&eacute; of Lord Archer's deceptions, Stranger than Fiction, this proposal for a companion volume was never likely to appeal to Mary Archer. Whichever came first, Margaret's antipathy, or Mary's obstructiveness, the result is a study in hostility. For example, Mary is semi-ridiculed for appearing in a new "eyecatching designer outfit", and then twitted for greeting Jeffrey, on his return from prison, in a dress "at least six years old". She is charged with having a face lift, then rebuked for wanting to keep it a secret. She is chastised for occasionally lashing out, and then criticised for not doing so more often. The snitty asides, sustained over so many pages, are not just monotonous, they also have the occasional, quite unintended effect of evoking sympathy. Whatever the couple's private sexual arrangements, for example, it seems unlikely that Jeffrey Archer's many infidelities were painless for his wife. Crick, perhaps working on the assumption that anyone married to Jeffrey Archer cannot have feelings, introduces the subject as follows: "Unfortunately for Mary, one person certainly finding time to squeeze in a few extramarital affairs was the husband she liked so much." With this level of disaffection, it must have been hell for Crick to complete what reads, for all her obvious research, like a protracted cuts job, supplemented with great chunks of Jeffreyana and lacings of Christmas round-robin detail ("guests enjoyed a menu of 'ham mousse and Newnham souffl&eacute;'"). Actually, the great enigma of this book is not the mysterious bond between Archer and Archer, but what, exactly, Crick ever thought she saw in Mary.