The Naked Woman: A Study of the Female Body<br /> by Desmond Morris<br />  400pp, Cape, £17.99<br />  I wonder how many specimens Desmond Morris inspected before deciding that "every woman has a beautiful body", the statement which launches this book. Not enough, anyway, or he would surely have come across at least one that had gone wonky or started falling apart. He says our bodies are beautiful because they are "the brilliant end-point of millions of years of evolution". But you could say that about a slug.  Still, the admiration evinced throughout Morris's "guided tour of the female body" will make a nice change for women who have come to detest their unwieldy carcasses for not resembling the bodies of unusually thin pubescent girls, and fear the consequences should they ever stop attempting to disguise the general wear and tear that men find so nauseating in our sex. With a lack of restraint that verges, occasionally, on the reckless, Morris rhapsodises everything that takes his fancy. Most memorably, hair, which stirs reflections on men's "quest for the softly flowing locks they dream of caressing". Even a woman whose hair or face is nothing to boast about may well be in possession of a working back, highly commended as "a brilliantly assembled set of muscle and bones with the twin functions of body support and spinal-cord protection". Other humdrum body parts are special, he points out, in being superior to the male equivalent. Female hands are singled out for praise, having "far greater finesse when it comes to the delicate handling of small objects". And, on looking down, one finds that one's hands are, in fact, rather nicely designed. Thank you Desmond. If only more men had your respect for the precision grip.   It may seem a poor return for all these nice compliments, but beyond sharing his affection for body parts with which many of us are wearily familiar, it is not clear what Morris wants to say. Even his ardour occasionally grates. He does not consider the diseases that are apt to afflict the most brilliant end-point of evolution, nor does he notice the tedious, commonplace complaints that can leave the female body something less than beautiful. Feet, for instance, are all very well on the ends of our legs, but it seems pushing it, rather, to go on about how "wonderfully they perform", how uncomplainingly they "effortlessly serve us and steer us through our changing environment". Plainly, the man has never seen a bunion.   But perhaps seen-it-all adult women are not the ideal tourists for this particular trip. Perhaps, as with Morris's celebrated  The Naked Ape (1967),  The Naked Woman's natural audience is composed of inquisitive adolescent boys. It certainly has a very promising bottom on the cover; though even the most eager schoolboy may be disappointed by the amount of space devoted to things like ears, noses and cheeks - and all the other bits of standard female equipment that are not, give or take a few hairs, really so different from his own.   With breasts, bottoms and so forth, Morris is obviously on safer ground. If British sex education is in the sorry state indicated by our teenage pregnancy figures, then the more boys who learn the whereabouts of the U-spot and the elusive Anterior Fornix Erogenous Zone the better (a map or diagram would have been a bonus). The boys will also be intrigued - supposing it does not have a Ruskin-like effect on more delicate students - to discover the international variations in women's pubic hair. In the Far East, Morris discloses, "the straight black head-hair is matched by pubic hair that has been described as 'black, short, straight and not thick but rather sparse ... forming a somewhat narrow triangle with apex upwards.'" Young admirers of the Guinness Book of Records may also relish the many curious facts Morris has crammed into his appreciation. The merkin (pubic wig), inevitably, gets a look in. But did you know that there was once a French woman with "no fewer than five pairs of fully lactating breasts"? Or that in 15th-century Venice a law was passed requiring prostitutes to expose their breasts? No notes substantiate such easily forgotten asides, but nonetheless: just fancy.   The Naked Woman abounds in these factoids; some interesting, some freakish, some dubious - many most amazing for the importance Morris attaches to them. We are familiar, of course, with the idea of cabinets of curiosities, collections of shells, bone, fossils. But one pictures this eminent zoologist with his Kinsey Report and Guinness Book of Records conveniently to hand, poring over sheafs of yellowed cuttings gathered over the years, carefully recording the fact that, in 2003, a woman with a tongue stud was struck by lightning in Corfu; or alighting on the story of another woman, in Connecticut, who attacked her unfaithful husband with her nails: "The injured man required 24 stitches to close the wound in his scrotum."   Not all Morris's anecdotes have been so laboriously collated. Once he has dealt, briskly enough, with the adaptive significance, physiology and function of a body part, most of his chapters rapidly decline into pages of loosely themed remarks that might look feeble if you found them in a child's project. Hairstyles, he notes, are not permanent."When the hair grows out, new styles can be tried." When it has grown, "a ponytail can be a useful device to control untidy hair, both in the workplace and in the home." Musing on breasts, he notes that "the combination of 'bra and panties' remains with us to this day as the favoured form of female underwear". A lined forehead is "a telltale sign that its owner is no longer young". And so, some might say, is a book like this.