Watching the English: The Hidden Rules of English Behaviour<br />by Kate Fox <br />424pp, Hodder, £20<br />  It was quite a consolation to finish Kate Fox's analysis of Englishness in the departure lounge of Heraklion airport, where, in what resembled some mass audition for Wifeswap, a few hundred English people were unselfconsciously squabbling and cursing and barging into one another. For Fox says we are not like that at all. "Social dis-ease", she decides, is the "central core of Englishness". She holds this congenital awkwardness responsible for everything from our "obsession with privacy" to our celebrated courtesy, famous reserve and infinite capacity for embarrassment. "We do everything in moderation," she believes.  Fox's curiosity about English behaviour, which she attempts to reduce, in this prodigously long investigation, into key constituent parts, is matched only by her regret that we are not a more free and easy nationality. You gather that Fox and her fianc Henry (both prominent figures in her research findings) prefer the dashing and riotous to the stilted and cautious behaviour which, her report claims, continues to dominate English social proceedings. For instance, we say "sorry" when someone else bumps into us, and take too much notice of queueing while pretending not to. But then, as well as being almost deranged with embarrassment, we are also "hypocrites". We are, in fact, "the most repressed and inhibited people on earth". Which must make us even more repressed and inhibited than the Japanese royal family and the monks of Mount Athos.   Since Fox is a leading social anthropologist, we must believe her when she tells us that our rites of passage also leave a good deal to be desired. It "seems a shame", she says, "that there is no special ritual to mark the completion of secondary education". Maybe we're too mean to pay for them. Contemplating the cautious attitudes of young English people towards work and money, Fox professes herself "disappointed" to find them planning for the future and "not much cheered" to discover an early aversion to being in debt. This is not, you take it, Fox's recommended approach to being young, English and affluent. Where will it end, she frets, this "worrying trend" of "risk aversion and obsession with safety"? I don't know. Hull? Somewhere in the opposite direction from that other English trend of remortgaging and devil-may-care credit-card spending?   If Fox's casual flourishes - "but, hey ...", girlish hyperbole, and reliance on the word "umpteen" - are unlikely to do much for her academic reputation, the chicklittish attempts to ingratiate suggest that it is not Bronislaw Malinowksi she wants to be, but the next Peter York (who did, at least, introduce us to the Sloane Ranger). Fox, on the other hand, is happy to expose the working-class habit of saying things like "nuffink" and "serviette" along with other mannerisms more succinctly summarised in Betjeman's "How to Get on in Society": "Phone for the fishknives Norman ... " Still, one day her exhaustive observations on these "hidden" rules may prove invaluable to visitors from another planet. They may not know that "M&amp;S is a sort of department store", or realise that "some working class people ... still believe in starting the day with a 'cooked breakfast' ... this feast may often be eaten in a 'caff' rather than at home ..."   Fox has worked so hard to be charming and fun that she seems to lack the energy, or invention, that would be required to reconcile her theory of an inhibited and "dis-eased" nation with the evidence of increasingly unbuttoned, culturally diverse and unpredictable forms of Englishness. Or Europeanness. A good many of Fox's selected "English" traits - love of privacy, clubs, DIY and talking about the weather - seem remarkably similar to the French or German love of privacy, clubs, DIY and talking about the weather. But, as the author often reminds us, it's her book, and what interests her are "the causes of good behaviour". So what are these causes? "To be honest, I don't know why the English are the way we are - and nor, if they are being honest, does anyone else." Fanks for nuffink, as working-class people sometimes say, on finishing a generous but far from nutritious feast of "social anthropology".