Snobs: A Novel <br />by Julian Fellowes <br />320pp, Weidenfeld, £12.99  Edith Lavery, the heroine of Snobs, has, like Thackeray's Becky Sharp, but one ambition: to find a wealthy husband who will give her a position in society. "How else was she to enjoy the good things in life if she did not marry them?" And even though her search for greatness is conducted during the 1990s, as opposed to the Napoleonic wars, in the world according to Julian Fellowes Edith's appraisal of her prospects makes perfect sense. Unearned greatness, to the snobs he fondly describes, is the very nicest kind of greatness, and it belongs exclusively to the aristocracy. Entry to the aristocracy can be achieved only through marriage. So, unlike Becky Sharp, Edith is something of a role model. Fellowes is married to a niece of Earl Kitchener.  After they are introduced by their mutual friend, the actor/ upper-class person who is the narrator of Snobs, Edith - daughter of a Jewish accountant - sets her sights on the heir to Broughton Hall. Lord Charles Broughton is so grand that even his hair is upper class: "... that fair Rupert Brooke hair, crinkly curls at the nape of his neck, that is so characteristic of the English aristocrat". To the acute annoyance of Lord Charles's mother, Edith gets her man. "Which of us has his desire? or, having it, is satisified?", writes Thackeray, after Becky Sharp has plummeted to earth. Not the new Lady Broughton. Her husband is afflicted by three disabilities which, no less than his hair, are so characteristic of the English aristocrat. He is dim, dull and comically hopeless at sexual intercourse. "Charles, like all men of his type, had the greatest possible distaste for any of the mechanics of womanhood."   Edith is bored. Not even the prospect of rewriting the guidebook can cheer her up. Before you can say serviette she has fallen for an actor in a costume drama and started out on her return journey to social oblivion. The exalted group that Fellowes likes to capitalise as the Gang, the Inner Circle or Society instantly cuts her dead. Edith discovers the agony of being denied entry to Annabel's. She is obliged to buy chain-store clothes, which cruelly expose the housemaid genes that made her marriage an unfortunate experiment in what the narrator terms "miscegenation". If there are few surprises among the humiliations subsequently meted out to this "child of an arriviste" - snubbed by those who sometime did suck up to her, stuck in a poky flat, tortured by the longing for the splendour she so lightly discarded - Edith's cautionary tale provides a serviceable pretext for what is really a doting guide to the English aristocracy.   For the novice climber, Fellowes's guide to the basics of social mountaineering should prove a godsend. It is illustrated with some cherishably nasty,  Gosford Park-style scenes of aristocratic point-scoring, and is far more illuminating than a copy of  Correct Form on the customs and affectations designed to ensure that Gang members can always be distinguished from everybody else.  Snobs is not too grand to answer the most basic questions. How should I word it? "The upper classes only ever address an envelope to the female part of a couple." How should I arrange a "really smart" wedding? "It is out of the question that the company should do anything as middle class or sensible as sit down to eat." And a smart case of depression? "The very word counsellor sends a shudder of disgust down any truly well-bred spine." There is just one important omission. Nowhere does Fellowes say what these truly well-bred people call the toilet.   Maybe because he is not just the husband of Lord Kitchener's niece but an actor as well, Fellowes is engagingly acute on "the aristocracy's consciously created   image" - ie, its absolute reliance on the correct sets, props, costumes and audience. "The English upper classes", he says, "have a deep, subconscious need to read their difference in the artefacts about them." Lord Charles, when we first spot him busily owning his estate on a hot summer day, is wearing "tweeds and corduroys despite the weather and one of those tiresome brown felt derbies that Englishmen in the country imagine to be dashing". The "tiresome" is one of many reminders that, even if the narrator is enough of an outsider to see the absurdities of his friends, posh will always be his first language.   So much so, that if well-bred Fellowes doesn't do something such as invent a plausible sequence of events, it is probably because making things up is common. Smart fiction does not go in for ostentatious plotting: the climactic scene in  Snobs depends on Lord Charles not ever being available on the telephone. Smart fiction has no need for show-offy characterisation: Lord Charles is "like all his breed", he has "one of those English bodies" and his sister is "one of those children of the purple". Similarly for the proles: Edith is "one of those flawlessly dressed women", her actor is "one of those actors", appearing in "one of those made-for-television pieces". Foreigners are simply "this Levantine", "some dusky premier", "northerners". As for Snobs, it is one of those books one imagines being sent up to Balmoral, come September, where it will be proclaimed divinely funny and quite amazingly true to life.