Rhythms of Life: The Biological Clocks that Control the Daily Lives of Every Living Thing  <br />by Russell Foster and Leon Kreitzman <br />292pp, Profile, £20  When Margaret Thatcher was in power, her ability to get by on four hours' sleep was widely taken, even by those who didn't much care for her, to be illustrative of the woman's prodigious determination to stay in charge. So much so that there remains the faintest suspicion that any leaders, such as Bush and Blair, who like a good eight hours, are slacking in their duty to stay up, watching over us.  Russell Foster and Leon Kreitzman's illuminating study of biological clocks suggests that in Thatcher's case, we should have been more alarmed than impressed by her working hours, because "our cognitive abilities change rythmically over a 24-hour period". Even the intensity of toothache, the probability of an asthma or gout attack, and the strength of a handshake will fluctuate according to the time of day. The variations are not insignificant. Poor visibility is not the only reason why so many catastrophic accidents, including Chernobyl, Bhopal and the wreck of the Exxon Valdez, have occurred at night. For workers on the night   shift, the authors point out, the risk of injury is "over 20% higher than on the day shift".   "Depending on the task," they report, "the performance change between the daily high point can be equivalent to the effect on performance of drinking the legal limit of alcohol. The best time for doing a given task depends on the nature of the task."   It is not entirely surprising to discover that the best time for complex problem solving and logical reasoning is around noon. On the other hand: "Tasks that rely more on physical coordination, such as athletic events, are performed best in the early evening." What is the best time for working out the poll tax? Or deciding whether or not to privatise the railways? Even in the absence of extensive research, one feels fairly confident that the answer to both questions is not two o'clock in the morning.   Such extreme defiance of the night is the more perverse when you consider that most of us already live in a world where, as the authors baldly put it, the imposed 24/7 structure "is in conflict with our basic biology". We are "beset with all manner of artificial timing cues". Such as alarm clocks. Or, going back a bit, sundials. Until these were invented in brainy Mesopotamia (now Iraq), 5,000 years ago, men and women lived by what the authors call "natural time". (Up to a point, surely: didn't cavemen ever stay up late, finishing off their paintings?) The old day/ night routine may have been a bit restrictive, but it was obviously much more relaxed. Half a century after sundials had been introduced in Greece, the Roman playwright Plautus had a character grumbling about the tyranny of time-keeping - "the town's so full of these confounded dials".   What annoyed this character, in the second century BC, was having the dial, rather than his own, fluctuating appetite, dictate mealtimes. Today, the tension between internal and external clocks, the consequences of living - in the west, at any rate - in a relentlessly illuminated world in which the body's own circadian rhythms (which still respond to natural changes in day length) conflict with the requirements of an imposed, arbitrarily scheduled working day or night, is yet more pronounced. It is making us ill.   About 3% of people in the UK, for example, are thought to be afflicted by seasonal affective disorder, or SAD, a depressive illness brought on by reduced daylight, or by having to keep on going in reduced daylight. But anyone who has suffered from jetlag has experienced the jangling consequences of this conflict between internal and external clocks for themselves. British Airways warns sufferers that their "decision-making ability" may be downgraded by as much as 50%, and attention by 75% - which is something to think about the next time Mr Blair flies off on one of his rounds of non-stop international statesmanship.   If the lessons of chronobiology - the study of biological rhythms - are disregarded in the planning of almost all human activities except war and manned space missions, it is possibly because, as the authors relate, rival scientists have been unable to agree whether this subject is a branch of evolutionary biology, or a separate discipline with implications for the study of growth, ageing and medicine. The first group's unworldly preoccupation with the mechanics of the subject has even earned them the disparaging nickname "clockwatchers". Although Foster and Kreitzman are thought-provoking and occasionally droll on    the human determination to outwit or ignore the endogenous clock, their anecdotes about jetlag and supersoldiers, owls and larks, are primarily there, you suspect, to sugar the pill for lay readers. The bulk of Rhythms of Life is a serious and at times austere summary of the clockwatchers' research into the origins of rhythmic behaviour, right down to the recent discovery that even bacteria possess their own biological clocks.   It is courtesy of these clockwatchers that we now know the location of a central mammalian clock, which drives an individual creature's daily rhythms. In the middle of the last century, an obsessive physiologist, Curtis Richter, decided it must be in there somewhere, and tracked it down through an awesomely gruesome process of elimination: "Richter removed adrenals, gonads, pituitary, thyroid, pineal, pancreas. He gave his rats electroshock therapy, induced convulsions and prolonged anaesthesia, and... even got them blind drunk. Still they were rhythmic." Eventually, he got to the brain, and - eureka! - the rhythms went wonky. The clock was finally located in a cluster of cells towards the front of the brain. The interaction of day length and this internal biological clock tells creatures when to migrate, spawn, mate and hiber nate. And the evolutionary selection pressure to get this timing right - if, for example, deer are born too early they will die - has resulted in some extraordinarily precise responses. "At higher latitudes, a difference in day length of only eight to 10 minutes will trigger in many species the reproductive, migratory and hibernatory processes."   The authors anticipate that parts of their summary will delight only those to whom phrases such as "dPER in its free form is phosphorylated by DBT but not when it is bound to dTIM" are as clear as day (they recommend skipping rather than giving up when the going gets really tough). But much of their book is lucid enough to leave one in no doubt that the advance of the 24/7 society is something to be resisted very vigorously. Rather oddly, after all their tales of disaster and depression, Foster and Kreitzman seem more inclined to capitulate, suggesting that a handy pill might help us, in the manner of Mrs Thatcher, to "gain time by reducing the amount we sleep". And maybe they're right: there will be plenty of time for sleeping later. The Grim Reaper, incidentally, turns out to be a lark: you are most likely to die in the early morning.