The House of Lords used to be the politest place in the land. Nobody ever shouted, like David Cameron, "you're useless!" No one yelled "wrong, wrong, wrong!" You would be as likely to see a food fight in the Athenaeum. There were ways of disagreeing. For example, if someone suggested the return of child chimney sweeps: "The noble lord makes an intriguing point and one which your lordships may wish to ponder. However, Her Majesty's government feels unable, at this particular time, to make the commitment he requests." All is changed, changed utterly. It's almost as nasty as the Commons now. Take the question about the ratification of the Lisbon treaty yesterday. It was answered by Lord Brett, of whom I have never heard, but who appears to be a minister in the Foreign Office. He took the opportunity to gloat about the Tories' problems on this issue. I might have paid more attention to what he said if he had not appeared to be channelling the late Les Dawson, whom he resembles both in voice and appearance. "My old mum used to say: 'Never intrude into private grief," he said. There would be plenty of public grief if the Tories got their way. Lord Howell, the Tory spokesman, said: "I knew we wouldn't get far without this kind of vacuous exchange." Lord Brett: "I noted the comments about the vacuous comments, and I appreciate the vacuous comments he added. Ooh, missus!" (He didn't actually use the last two words, but some of the peers did go "Whooo!") Here's a pub quiz question. "What is 10 in London and 1 in Warsaw?" The answer is the letter Z in Scrabble. Lord Dykes said that the Polish papers were much better than our own, lacking the anti-European hysteria shown by quite a few members of the Conservative party. Whooo! Lord Brett claimed to be concerned about the Tories' strange allies in Europe. "Another maxim of my old mum was: 'By their friends they shall be known.'" We are being governed by the spirit of Lord Brett's mother. But everyone got off lightly compared with poor Lord Young of Norwood Green, who answered a question about grants for disabled students. Apparently these are in a terrible mess. It's the usual combination of arrogance, privatisation and computer cock-ups. Being New Labour, Lord Young called the situation "a success story". Lord Hunt, for the Tories, asked what, in that case, he would call a failure. "The higher education policies of the last [Tory] government" he replied. "That would be my description of a failure." The Tories jeered at the wretched response. Lord Young was, I fear, humiliated by everyone. Peers from all sides circled him like hyenas spotting a wildebeest with a limp. We only returned to normality with Lord West of Spithead, who contrived to work in praise for our heroic Royal Navy into an answer about cannabis use. I thought he might take the salute, or at least splice the mainbrace, whatever that means.