There's no alternative to saying it bluntly. Tony Blair robbed the grave of a dead toddler in the spring of 1993 and exploited the suffering of his family to create a dangerous and hypocritical political style.  The words may sound hard but in my experience only a harsh tone can make progressives wonder if the charges they throw at conservatives could not be thrown back at them with force. After a Queen's Speech which saw a Labour Government propose to assault trial by jury and prejudice fair trials, harsh language is needed to do justice to the unjust consequences of the Bulger case. They will afflict us long after the boy's killers have been released to enjoy what freedom from violence the media's Committee for Public Safety allows them.  Shroud waving was rare in Britain before James Bulger's death. Thatcherism was about breaking the unions and privatisation. Its clean little secret was that its crime policies were quietly sensible. With the exception of Leon Brittan, Conservative Home Secretaries tried in their muddled way to be straight with the public. Douglas Hurd, Kenneth Baker, David Waddington, Kenneth Clarke and Michael Howard refused to fill the prisons to please the tabloids.  The Michael Howard in that last paragraph wasn't a mistake. He was a reasonable Home Secretary, until Blair came along, who was anxious to rehabilitate minor offenders by getting them out of jail, which the Tories said were 'an expensive way of making bad people worse'.  Many find it hard to say 'liberal' without adding 'hypocrite' precisely because liberals denounce their opponents' policies as reaction and neo-fascism while staying silent when their side performs identical stunts. Howard is denounced to this day by right-thinking people, who go on to grant every indulgence to Blair.  I was a young reporter in the early Nineties and loathed Howard with the best of my liberal colleagues. He was a Tory and that was enough. My job was to get rid of Tories and, faute de mieux, I got to know Blair. He was a touch prissy for my tastes and his language had a formulaic ring even then. But he seemed to mean well.  In the weeks before James Bulger was killed, I got a draft of a torrid speech by David Maclean, a junior Minister in Howard's Home Office. The justice system was 'on the side of the criminal', Maclean had intended to rage, and vigilantes had a point. The police must have the power to drive offenders from the streets like 'vermin'.  We're used to such tosh today, but at the time Ministers didn't talk like that. Howard was appalled and Maclean's speech was rewritten. Instead of playing Dirty Harry, Howard required him to deliver a worthy lecture on crime prevention which, as I remember, made much of fitting good window locks.  My newspaper prepared to make mischief by comparing and contrasting the sensational original with the banal final product. I phoned Blair and invited him to join the fun. The future Prime Minister didn't want to come out and play. He listened to the 'vermin' and 'vigilantes' and fell silent.  'Come on Tony, aren't you going to condemn this?' No, actually, he wasn't. 'You see, a lot of Daily Mail readers would agree with Maclean,' he explained, and hung up.  At the time, I thought I'd just caught him in a wet patch and he'd roll out of it. I should have paid more attention.  After James Bulger's murder, Blair went to Wellingborough and announced that the killing was 'a hammer-blow against the sleeping conscience of the country'. It was a daring move. He was using a dead toddler as a symbol of the state of Britain under the Conservatives. Only under Labour, he said, would we find social peace by accepting we 'couldn't have rights without responsibilities'.  Roy Hattersley, Blair's predecessor as Labour's home affairs spokesman, would never have used the death of a child for political advantage. Nor would most serious Conservatives. There were reasons for restraint beyond good taste. The premise of the Wellingborough speech was demonstrably false.  James Bulger's murder 'said' nothing more (or less) about the state of Britain than that a horrible crime had taken place. It wasn't a symbol of anything. About 20 juveniles are convicted of murder or manslaughter each year. Nearly all are 14 or over. Killers as young as Jon Venables and Robert Thompson are incredibly rare, which is why the criminal-justice system has such difficulties knowing whether to punish or treat them. Ten-year-olds are usually too small to kill. Pre-pubescent murderers are freaks who appear without reason or pattern. Their numbers haven't been increasing or decreasing. They don't 'tell' the conscience of the country anything.  It might be objected that politicians and commentators are always striking postures and all Blair was trying to do was to help Labour pick up a few votes. If he had just been a grand-standing charlatan, I would have forgiven and rather admired him. But the spin had substance. Blair's talk of 'responsibility' meant abandoning his party's commitment to upholding liberty. He must have known how the Conservatives would re-spond. There was no way that the Tories were going to allow themselves to be out-flanked on the Right. Howard and Blair began an arms race. The politician who could invent the sterner penalties and cram more citizens into the foul jails would win.  Every parliament since has been stuffed with criminal justice bills. Yet the popularity of post-Bulger populism is moot. The Tories stood on a manifesto composed of Daily Mail editorials and suffered their second greatest defeat in history. Blair's appeal to the masses succeeded in persuading fewer people to vote Labour than supported Neil Kinnock when he lost in the 1992 election.  The new Parliament has provided ample justification for the electorate's cynicism. David Blunkett, the Home Secretary, has always pretended he was as anxious as Blair to stand up for the little guy against the élite. He, too, argues that we must accept greater responsibilities and children should learn about balancing duty and freedom.  There is no greater civic right or responsibility than to sit on a jury and reach an honest verdict on the guilt or innocence of your fellow citizens. Trial by jury is as much about the power to exercise democratic control in the legal system as it is about protecting suspects. The civic-minded David Blunkett's first act will be to slash juries back.  With his jury abolition programme, the pandering to alleged popular prejudice has reduced itself to absurdity. In the name of appealing to the people, the people will be barred from the courtroom. A supposedly populist government has decided that the population is too stupid and unreliable to be trusted. It would rather their ancient power went to judges, whose appointments and promotion prospects depend on that Great Commoner, Tony Blair's old friend, the unelected millionaire lawyer and Lord High Chancellor of All England, Lord Irvine of Lairg.