The Packington Estate squats by the side of a canal just to the north of the City of London. Around it are the Victorian and Georgian terraces which have made Islington synonymous with the latte-drinking sushi-eaters. The urban professionals and the working class don't mix. I've lived within a mile of Packington for almost 20 years but didn't visit the slab blocks until last week. The ugliness and inhumanity of the buildings is as much a deterrent as the fear of crime. A glimpse of their Sixties' look takes you back to a rotten past. Architects inspired by the deranged Utopianism of Le Corbusier and intent on building machines for living for a new type of human being who has yet to be found on this planet. Rapacious developers and tyrannical civil servants ordering the destruction of hundreds of thousands of perfectly good homes.  The great Victorian centre of Manchester bulldozed, Birmingham cursed with the Bull Ring, urban motorways ploughed through Glasgow, the London skyline studded with tower blocks which dwarfed St Paul's, Ronan Point collapsing and Bradford, Liverpool, Newcastle and half the remaining cities of Britain covered with prisons for the wretches who were too poor or infirm to escape.  It may be an ignored ghetto now, but Packington was briefly famous while the mania lasted. The local council had bought up a network of mid-Victorian streets and squares in 1965. Harry Brack, a Labour councillor, led the protests against its plan to replace them with municipal barracks. He went to Richard Crossman, Harold Wilson's Minister of Planning. In his diaries Crossman describes what happened next. Dame Evelyn Sharp, permanent secretary at the Department of Housing, who truly did come close to doing as much damage to Britain as the Luftwaffe, rushed out the decision to demolish before the protesters, or her own ministers, could stop her. MPs were furious about the cost - high density housing may be miserable to live in but it is expensive to build and maintain - and Crossman had to cover-up for the Civil Service.  He didn't mind overmuch. He had approved many similar schemes, berfore going home to the comfort of a converted Oxfordshire farmhouse. Brack was driven out of the Labour Party for voicing his dissent and Packington was built.  As in so many other estates, the communal spaces were colonised by gangs, the communal doorways were taken over by drug dealers, the windows leaked, the wallpaper peeled off with condensation and everyone could hear what everyone else was doing three, four, five or even six floors away.  None the less the unexpected resistance Packington provoked was a sign that the end was coming. By the 1970s, BBC2 could broadcast City of Towers, a documentary by Christopher Booker which marked the high-point of public revulsion at what the modernists had wrought.  Booker described the destruction of the cities as 'the greatest disaster to befall post-war Britain'. But he concluded the calamity was over. The modernist world with its totalitarian designs to remould cities and their inhabitants was dead. The future belonged to conservation projects and small-scale, human developments.  And so it seemed throughout the rest twentieth century. Even the Packington story appeared to have a happy ending. Despite costing a fortune, it was a potential death trap. In 2003, the council took all the gas cookers out for fear of the catastrophic effects of a small explosion. Delighted residents were told that the estate was to be torn down and rebuilt.  In these circumstances it may seem perverse to drag-up all this old stuff. How many people under 50 know about Le Corbusier or John Poulson bribing Reginald Maudling or Dame Evelyn Sharp or all the other batty or bent figures from the discredited past?  Not many I'd guess. But they ought to because the swinging Sixties are back.  When I met the Packington residents they weren't the menacing poor of middle-class nightmare, but well-mannered and cogent people who had put up with too much for too long. Their estate was going to be pulled down ... and about bloody time, they said. They told the council it should go back to the Victorian street-plan and build terraces along the restored squares and roads.  They wanted what everyone in England with children wants: a house with a patch of garden they could call their own. Modernism was in part a reaction by a section of the estranged intelligentsia against this unshakable national preference by architects and planners who thought it was somehow better - more modern - for the English to be French.  The Liberal Democrat Council ignored them. It has carried on where the men and women of the Sixties left off and said that the old six-storey slab blocks should be replaced by new eight-storey slab blocks.  It wasn't a capricious decision by a local little Hitler but a faithful following of government policy. Very quietly the Blair government is repeating mistakes of the Wilson government. Sharp-eyed observers could see the burnt fool's bandaged finger was waggling back to the fire as early as 2000 when John Prescott issued an obscure document - Government Planning Guidance (PPG3) - which announced that increasing housing density was a national priority. Now the message is everywhere. 'Improving the quality of design and the quantum of density are two of the most urgent and important issues facing the house-building industry, declared Lord Falconer, who in the best Crossman tradition doesn't live in a slab block himself, but a lovely Islington villa.  Once again the wrecker's ball is swinging. Prescott has ordered thousands of Victorian terrace houses to be demolished across the north of England.  Even Lord Rogers, who designs tower blocks from his office in his double-fronted Georgian home, has warned Ministers that they should 'first of all conserve existing buildings wherever possible, for they are part of our history and create a spirit of place'. There's no sign that his sensible advice is being taken.  The old alliance of greedy property developers, extravagant architects and unhinged politicians is once again producing grand projects. Ken Livingstone, London's mayor and a civic leader as unaccountable as any the twentieth century produced, wants giant tower blocks to march along the banks of the Thames.  Sir Terry Farrell is proposing to throw up tower blocks at Lots Road in Hammersmith. When Brendan Bird, a campaigner for working-class tenants, asked a public inquiry if the developers could show him the space on the plans for children to play, they couldn't.  Meanwhile, the demolition of Packington is set to start. Sam Webb, an architect who has been advising tenants since the collapse of Ronan Point in 1968, has collected a list of 24 Sixties estates in London, Birmingham, Manchester, the Black Country, Sunderland and Northern Ireland, which may soon be unfit for human habitation. But if and when the high-density flats come down, the odds are that they will be replaced with ... more high-density flats.  The real reason is money. Terraces have been easy to build since Sir Christopher Wren's day. If it wasn't for the complexity of modern regulations, any half-competent builder could do it without the help of an architect. The rewards and the kudos are in high-density building.  Developers can't say that. The paradox of history is that the official reason they give for the return of high-density housing is that it's better for the environment. The modernist movement was stopped by conservationists in the 1970s. Now conservationist arguments are being used to justify a return to modernism. High density flats are meant to be good for the environment because they concentrate people in cities and protect the green belt.  It sounds plausible, but it is far from clear that the green belt is worth protecting - particularly when the green belts around London and many other lowland cities are occupied by industrial farmers. If the number of small homes with small gardens was allowed to expand, there would be more trees, more plants, more birds, more insects and more small mammals than if the land was left in the hands of agri-business.  The residents of Packington would be happy to live in them. Better still, so would Lord Rogers, John Prescott, Lord Falconer, Ken Livingstone and all the other grand and powerful people who have spent their lives declaring 'live where I say but not where I do'.