In 1999, BBC documentary-makers secured an exclusive. They persuaded advertisers to go on camera and give an honest account of how they manipulated children. The date was significant. Before the 1990s, advertisers pretended that they had no effect on society, that all they did was reshuffle the pack by persuading customers to move from one brand to another. Their patter was humbug, but it recognised that advertisers would be punished by their enemies if they didn't observe the niceties. By 1999, the free market appeared to have no enemies left. Communism was dead and social democracy and traditional conservatism were in decline. With the dotcom bubble increasing to ever more incredible proportions and raw capitalism sweeping the globe, there was no need to play the hypocrite. Admen could relax and explain their tricks without worrying about reprisals.  Stephen Colegrave of Saatchi and Saatchi described how the trade exploited children's fear of being picked on by the unforgiving playground crowd. 'Brands are the stamp of authenticity,' he said with a smile. 'In the playground, if you have the wrong type of training shoes, then you are excluded. The thing about kids is, yes, they are keen to be individuals, but there is nothing worse than not being the right type of individual who is included in the group. If you have something nearly right, if you've just got it slightly wrong, then it's completely wrong.'  To work out which brand made a child the 'right type of individual', Saatchi and Saatchi organised a 'Marketing to Kids' conference which featured 'an interactive workshop using real children'. Rival firms put toddlers in focus groups and sent researchers into children's bedrooms.  Peter Mead, the chairman of Abbott Mead Vickers, said that 'this generation of kids is being bombarded with more messages than any other group of kids in history'. The average child saw 18,000 ads a year. Corporations spent more on working out how to make children buy food and toys than the British state spent on finding out how to teach them to read and write.  It took a long time for the consequences of the assault to become obvious. Only in the 1990s did market researchers notice that children were getting older younger. Seven-year-old girls were demanding make-up and superfluous bras. Boys were giving up Lego at six. Martin Phelps of Ogilvy and Mather said that the premature ageing of children was more striking in Britain than in any developed country, which, given the unfettered commercialisation, of childhood was scarcely surprising.  The reason for the commercial interest is obvious enough: children are gullible, child-like in fact. The older peo ple are, the less likely they are to be influenced by propaganda, which is why religions and advertisers fight so hard to reach the youth audience. Mead enthused: 'The great thing about children is that their memory banks are relatively empty so any message that goes in gets retained.' Colegrave agreed: 'Children are much easier to reach with advertising. They pick up on it fast and quite often we can exploit that relationship and get them pestering their parents.'  There was a small fuss after the documentary was broadcast. But all the advertising industry had done was confirm what everyone knew and the complaints died down. What parent, after all, needs to have pester-power explained to them? It isn't news. According to the Consumers' Association, half of parents think that adverts encourage their children to eat until they burst. Soft drink consumption has risen 30-fold since the 1950s. Consumption of sweets is 25 times as high. One in five children under four is overweight. One in four is obese... I could go on, but do I really need to paint a picture?  Everyone knows that we risk the overturning of the natural order of parents fighting to give their children better lives than they enjoyed. Advertising, television, the selling off of school playing fields and a fear of crime that keeps children indoors all work against it. There's a chance that the next generation will have shorter and sicker lives than their parents.  In these circumstances, Tessa Jowell's refusal to ban advertising aimed at children looks like yet another capitulation before the capitalist ideology that any constraint on the market is pernicious; another sell-out. But Jowell is 56 and a politician of the liberal-Left. To understand her refusal to act, you have to understand the conclusion of a convoluted intellectual journey of a large part of the leftish wing of her generation. It has left them unable to defend their children.  Most of the people at the top of the Labour Party, the liberal media and the state arts bureaucracies were young in the 1960s and early 1970s. They felt the revolutionary fervour of the times and, in some cases, stirred it up a bit themselves. As the fervour declined and the inevitable failures accompanied the successes, many fell under the influence of a pseudo-radical populism. In the universities, to where so many of the children of 1968 retreated, a consoling reconciliation with consumerism became the fashion.  The consolation ran as follows. When we were young, we assumed that the reason why the masses didn't rise up when we called on them to revolt was because they had been brainwashed by the media and the advertisers; that they were, in Marxist terms, the victims of a false consciousness. We now realise that we were being elitist. Wouldn't it be more democratic, more radical even, to assume that that the masses are made up of savvy individuals capable of ignoring the propaganda and taking what they want from the supermarkets and the television channels and using them for their own subversive purposes?'  There was much to be said for the argument when it was first made, but it ossified into dogma long ago. Last week, Caitlin Moran of the Times had great fun exposing how a London university had just published Reading Sex and the City, a scholarly tome which included chapters such as 'Orgasm &amp; Empowerment: Sex and the City and the Third Wave of Feminism'. (Samantha's outfits have 'vulval symbolism', the reader is told, and each shoe 'enables the wearer to access, in a Lacanian sense, a more ideal and complete version of herself'.)  What the Times didn't say was that tosh of this sort has been churned out by thousands of academics for years. Ever since a half-witted cultural commentator declared that Madonna was a great feminist, teachers haven't been able to leave the kids alone to enjoy popular culture, but have insisted on finding ever-more unlikely ways of emphasising its subversive potential.  You can't begin to understand the careers of Greg Dyke or Chris Smith, the national humiliation of the dome and of Channel 4 and BBC2 if you don't understand that business's search for the lowest common denominator and the largest market share is seen by many on the Left as an act of radicalism which empowers the people.  From a different direction, they've ended up in the same place as the free-market Right. To the Right, the customer is king. To the Left, the customer is subversive. Neither can admit that the sovereign consumer/person can be anything other than in control. The result has been a great blurring of distinctions. Who, for instance, would you say is speaking here?  'For heaven's sake, let's get over our hang-up about who owns what. The future landscape of the media [will be] about the life-building dynamic of images and information where nobody is a sole provider, because the thinking, articulate, emancipated viewer is the only king in his or her sovereign individualistic millions.'  It sounds like a post-modern academic after a long day extolling the transgressive lesbian narratives she had found in Emmerdale Farm. In fact, it was Andrew Knight, when he was chief executive of Rupert Murdoch's newspaper empire explaining why no one should worry if his employer owned every TV station in Britain or, presumably, the world. Even if Murdoch ran everything, he still wouldn't be able to force his views on the 'sovereign individualistic millions'.  As children get fatter and more stupid, what neither side of the non-debate can admit is that propaganda works and that the young need to be protected from advertising for the same reason they need to be protected from sex - they're not old enough to handle it.  As the Labour Party tries to pull itself together, many of its more thoughtful figures are realising that it can become the natural party of government only if it takes on the huge issues of how we bring up children.  Women were more likely than men to vote Conservative in the twentieth century because they thought that the party of the family was offering them security. Labour could become the party of the parent in the twenty-first if it can break out of a leftish intellectual climate which provides half-baked rationalisations for junk culture and the men in control of it.  It shouldn't be so hard to make the break. In my experience, no one changes their mind faster than the liberal parent who sees the malign effects of the values they've espoused for years on their own dear children.