If you live in a large town or city, you face the alarming prospect of becoming a Londoner whether you like it or not. London's policies are about to go national. Its congestion charge had its first anniversary last week and was greeted as a model for every city between Wick and Penzance to follow.  The enthusiasm was a touch perplexing. The tax has indeed cut congestion and raised money to improve bus services. But it remains a flat-rate charge, as unfair as the poll tax, VAT or the television licence fee. Investment bankers purring into the City no more worry about paying £5-a-day than dumping shares on gullible punters, but £5 is enough to force nurses and shop girls to get out of their way and off the road.  The praise heaped on a regressive tax by progressives is not the smallest of the oddities of the cult of the capital. Labour supporters are hailing Ken Livingstone, London's mayor, as an authentic article in a political world stuffed with fakes. He takes risks and speaks his mind, the legend runs, while other politicians are moulded by focus groups. His near-certain re-election in May proves that it is possible to be left-wing and popular. On this reading, Tony Blair was bowing to the inevitable when he overruled horrified colleagues and readmitted Livingstone to New Labour. A weak Prime Minister, whom no one trusted, was buying himself a little popularity by basking in the reflected glory of the hero of the new Left.  Simon Hughes, the Liberal Democrat candidate for mayor, is trying with some desperation to tarnish the Livingstone image. In the run-up to the mayoral election he will argue that throughout his career Livingstone has been a vocal supporter of the Ken Livingstone Party. He took control of the old Greater London Council by organising a coup against the elected leader rather than putting himself before the voters. He said he wouldn't run against the Labour candidate for London mayor in 2000, and broke his promise. He said he would serve only one term, and broke that promise too.  But the criticisms of Livingstone's duplicitous record are back-handed compliments; acknowledgments that the public sees him as a refreshing and radical politician. Instead of accusing him of being ambitious - what politician isn't? - his opponents would do better to point out that London doesn't feel like a refreshingly radical city experiencing the joys of municipal socialism. The dismal truth is that rapacious property developers and megalomaniac speculators have never had a dearer friend than Red Ken, the socialist mayor of London.  Darren Johnson, leader of the London Green Party which has fallen out of love with the mayor it once supported, said that the reconciliation between Livingstone and Blair wasn't the loveless marriage of convenience it seemed. 'Cut away Livingstone's radical rhetoric and you find a bog-standard New Labour politician in the pro-business mould,' he said. 'Red Ken's radicalism is reserved for issues over which the mayor has no influence whatsoever.'  The record supports Johnson. A few weeks ago, Livingstone condemned the French for banning Muslim girls from wearing headscarfs to state schools. (I should explain to foreign readers that a soupy tolerance of religious fundamentalism is considered radical in parts of the British Left.) Before the Iraq War, he condemned George W. Bush as the greatest threat to world peace. (And once again I should explain that the belief that Bush is worse than Saddam Hussein is also considered evidence of radicalism in Britain.)  Closer to home, the only radicalism on offer to Londoners is the radicalism of capitalism let off the leash. If other British cities wish to imitate London, they need to go beyond introducing congestion charges and change their landscapes beyond recognition. Like many small men, Livingstone thinks big and is changing the London skyline as thoroughly as the Luftwaffe. Developers many thought were retired or dead are back in business. The Reichmann brothers, friends of Margaret Thatcher and Conrad Black in the 1980s, have allied with a Saudi prince to send new towers shooting up at Canary Wharf in London's Docklands.  Further down the River Thames, Irvine Sellar, a developer who goes back to the 1960s, plans to build the highest tower in Europe. The 'shard of glass' will taper as it rises to 1,016ft. Nearby St Paul's Cathedral will be a dowdy outbuilding in comparison, overshadowed by the hotels and offices of its gigantic neighbour. At the old Lotts Road power station 25-storey and 30-storey tower blocks will be thrown up. Next to the new building for Livingstone's London Assembly - which polite critics describe as a 'distended testicle', and taxi-drivers label more bluntly - residential towers 20-storeys high are being planned. IKEA wants London to have Britain's first high-rise DIY store. Sir Norman Foster has already erected an imitation of a giant gherkin in the City. And urging on the architects and speculators to create a new megalopolis is Ken Livingstone. As the skyline is broken up and the old city dwarfed, perhaps a grateful capital will acknowledge his vision and daring and rebrand London as 'Kengrad', the shining city of the future, whose towers can lift foreign-exchange dealers and business-class travellers away from the rubbish-strewn, crime-ridden streets and into the very heavens.  The unifying theme in the Red Ken building boom is a contempt for human scale. It isn't only St Paul's which will look small in the shadow of a 1,016ft tower. Tyrants from the pharaohs to Hitler and Stalin have known that monumental architecture confirms the power of the rulers and the impotence of their subjects. Kengrad will confirm the impotence of the citizen before the global market.  You might have expected the transformation of London to have been the subject of intense debate. On the one hand there are environmental arguments for high-density building as an antidote to urban sprawl. On the other, the English always drive ambitious politicians and architects to despair by preferring semis to continental apartments; small offices in narrow streets to Manhattan skyscrapers on boulevards.  But debate has been constricted by the fact that Livingstone, like every other mayor, is a creature of the high-water mark of New Labour control freakery in the late 1990s. The new government was determined to abolish the old council committees, which constrained the powers of local leaders and allowed the public and press to find out what was being proposed before deals were struck. It was far more business-like to turn council leaders into chief executives beholden to no one and free to cut deals in private. Chief executives in companies anxious to make money from councils were all for getting rid of the checks and balances of local democracy.  Elected mayors would spare them the necessity of having to make a case before sceptical councillors and interested members of the public. In evidence to MPs, an executive from Capita plc, a remarkably inept company which has won contracts to run everything from the Criminal Records Bureau to the London congestion charge, was explicit on this point. 'It helps if the leader is able to commit the council and have control over his or her group,' he explained.  In these circumstances the supposed contrast between Livingstone and Blair is largely phoney. The mayor of London is as free of local control as the Prime Minister is of Parliamentary control. Both greet big business with moist lips. Both are control freaks. The only real difference between them is that Livinstone has better spin doctors.  Readers outside London may be wondering why they should care. The reason for national alarm lies in the prospective tenants of Kengrad's towers. Government and mayor agree London's boom in financial services must be allowed to continue sucking in people from the regions. To cope with the population increase, London's airports must be allowed to expand; its roads must be widened; its green-belt used for expensive new homes.  For a Labour Party which was kept alive in the 1980s by the support of the north of England, Scotland and Wales, the decision to allow reckless development in the south-east is rank ingratitude. Scotland is losing population. The north is studded with towns where home owners can't give away their houses. Yet the development of the south-east continues as fiercely as under the Tories.  On reflection, London can't be the model for the rest of Britain. It may get London's congestion charges, but London's prosperity won't be exported beyond the M25.