The contempt of the British for politicians must have bemused that ever-curious Martian. Inflation and interest rates were low. Real earnings were up. Crime had been slashed. Its fall from a record high in the early 1990s was mirrored by the equally eye-popping fall in unemployment, to the embarrassment of conservatives in all parties who insisted there wasn't a connection between thieving and idleness. Of course, commuters couldn't get on a train with the hope of arriving on time. Once at work they laboured for ridiculous hours for executives who were free to engage in legalised looting. The benefits were real for all that, but they couldn't shake the ubiquitous belief that politicians were liars and crooks who were dragging the country to the dogs. Large portions of the electorate wouldn't pay them the cursory compliment of participating in the system which gave politics legitimacy. In the 2001 general election turnout was 59 per cent, the lowest in democratic history.  Depending which pundit you believe, participation in this week's English local elections may be 'good' by modern standards. The rows about war in Iraq may have politicised voters, encouraging more of them to go to the trouble of putting a cross on a ballot paper. A 'good' turnout is still pitifully small - about 35 per cent. No one would be surprised if it failed to jump this low barrier. Everyone would be astonished if it reached 43 per cent, the average turnout in the local elections of the 1970s.  The contests for the devolved assemblies of Wales and Scotland should be better. But there are worries in Wales that voting will sink to English levels. Scottish politicians fear that half the electorate won't bother to vote in elections to a parliament whose creation was once the fulfilment of a patriotic dream. Edinburgh has the real power constitutional reformers insisted must be granted if people were to be persuaded it was worth voting. Make elections matter, they argued, and the people will respond. Scotland is looking like a depressing antidote to democratic optimism.  What must hurt politicians is that the state in all its forms tries so hard to prove that it is as friendly and responsive as the supermarkets. I don't mean this in the normal snide way. Whatever you think of advertisers, they produce campaigns which enchant billions. Marketeers talk of 'emotional loyalty' to brands, and their language of love for products would be preposterous were it not an accurate description of what consumers feel. Politicians need to attract the punters and it must have appeared sensible to imitate the companies which were conquering the globe.  In a pamphlet for the leftish think-tank Catalyst*, Catherine Needham examines the mimicry of commerce. The desire to treat citizens as consumers is the unacknowledged thread that runs through Blair's two governments, she says. Take the case of spin. When journalists write about how they are treated - and we like nothing better than writing about ourselves - what we mean by spin is the manipulation of information by an Alastair Campbell who the more hysterical hacks present as a Goebbels in a well-cut suit.  The Government sees itself as a company selling a product. New Labour's 'four key messages' must be 'built into all areas of activity', Campbell told departments after the 1997 election. When things go wrong, the 'New Labour' brand name is 'badly contaminated' as Philip Gould, Blair's pollster, wrote in 2000. Earlier this year Blair said there was a need for a 'rebranding' of the 'progressive political project' to give his government a new energy.  It is all too clear that the Government sees the public as consumers, and believes it can be as popular as the supermarkets. Our goal, said Blair in 2001 is 'to put the consumer first'. Last year he was at it again. Public services must be reformed 'to deliver in a modern, consumer-focused fashion... Customer satisfaction has to become a culture, a way of life, not an added extra.'  Modern consumers undoubtedly like choice. I've lost count of the number of times I've seen the NHS compared unfavourably to Sainsbury's. The former doesn't respond to consumers; the latter is meant to attend to their every need. A fair question is: why have all the polls, market research and advertising failed? Why has a government with the goal of customer satisfaction become the victim of a consumer boycott.  We are nowhere near as powerful as we like to think when we consume. There are people who enjoy the 'retail experience' - and I can't begin to understand them. But I do know that the David Beckhams who take to shopping as a therapy to escape the cruelties Alex Ferguson and the world throw at them aren't behaving as citizens. They have a brief voluntary exchange with a sales assistant while they hand over their money, not a lifetime of being stuck with a country for better or worse. If what they want isn't on offer, they go elsewhere or give up. There's no sense of common citizenship, which is why Beckham can shop in Milan without identifying with Italy or feeling a sense of responsibility for that country's future. You may go to the same supermarket every week, but I doubt if you feel a passionate desire to get your candidate on the Tesco board. I doubt if you've given the membership of the Tesco board two seconds thought.  Shopping is the opposite of politics, and it shouldn't be a surprise that a corporate government is hollowing out democracy. Customers can't elect representatives to councils and parliaments to determine priorities, and in the process of discussion perhaps accept the need either to compromise or to assert one principle over another. The only way a consumer can protest is by complaining; by waving a copy of Which? magazine in the face of some poor sales assistant who can't answer back, or, in extreme cases, by suing. Shoppers are passive-aggressive: passive consumers of the options chosen by the big chains' buyers; aggressive complainers about the stores' real or imagined faults.  There's one last point: shopping isn't a matter of life and death. Short of a supermarket poisoning you, there's not much harm it can do. Children given a bad schooling may never recover. An operation which goes wrong can't be remedied. In the case of health, only the medically qualified can judge whether they are getting the right treatment. The consumer isn't sovereign.  The Government hopes that bringing choice into the public services will make the public love it and keep the middle classes loyal to the welfare state. There isn't a great deal of evidence to support this view. The inner-London middle class isn't typical, but in education it has experienced 'choice' at first hand. The result has been chaos.  Roads are clogged with parents taking children to schools miles from their homes. Tales of rage and frustration fill dinner parties. My favourite was a small bourgeois tragedy. To get their children into an excellent Catholic primary school, parents had to feign interest in a faith they had long abandoned and go to church.  Soon, attending a service wasn't enough. They had to help out with the flowers and the Sunday school. This they wearily did, even though church schools are publicly funded no one can explain why they are allowed to use selection policies to fill the pews. Just when they were looking forward to hearing that their fake piety had secured their child a place, the policy switched. The school had so many applicants it could afford to concentrate on those children most at risk from unbelief. These were judged to be the children of dubious couples where one impious parent refused to go to church. The couples who had done everything they were told were sent to the back of the queue.  It is an extreme version of a common predicament. The Audit Commission found that the introduction of the right to parental choice led to fewer parents being able to secure their first choice of school than before. What people want is good local schools and good local hospitals. A healthy democracy needs them to accept responsibility for how the schools and hospitals are run. What they are getting is the illusion of choice, and like Which? readers they resent and refuse to patronise the shops whose merchandise they can't control.  * Citizen-consumers by Catherine Needham, Catalyst, £5. Phone 020 7733 2111