Demand for redundant Parliament is lower than the stock market. Getting through the security and into that half-empty theatre is usually a matter of minutes. On Wednesday I turned the corner into Parliament Square and stumbled on what looked like the first night of a West End hit. Hundreds were piled up in a queue. They can't be desperate to hear the whispers of Iain Duncan Smith, I thought, Prime Minister's Questions are over.  After 20 minutes of sneaking forwards, I reached the front and saw the cause of the delay. The police were insisting on full body scans. They followed up every beep from covered watches or buckles. 'Worried about al-Qaeda?' I asked as an officer shoved a probe under my coat. It was far worse than that. The mad were lobbying Westminster, she replied. The strictest security I've seen around Parliament was ordered to protect our representatives from mentally ill constituents.  If the proposed Mental Health Bill becomes law, the Government believes the cops will be able to relax. It has been gripped by the delusion that psychiatrists can identify who will be a killer and lock them up before they strike. At the moment, doctors can only incarcerate those whose illnesses can be treated. If the Department of Health and the Home Office have their way, people who can't be helped will be imprisoned. The plain word for what the Government wants is internment. Just as Arabs are being held without trial because MI5 thinks they may be terrorists, but hasn't evidence which would stand scrutiny in open court, so the mentally ill will be imprisoned without trial because psychiatrists think they may be violent one day.  The usually fractious world of mental illness has united to denounce Ministers' medical Utopianism. Psychiatrists and psychologists from rival schools have frankly admitted they haven't the faintest idea who will be murderous. Dr Tony Zigmond of the Royal College of Psychiatrists has quantified his colleagues' ignorance. Even on the kindest assumptions about the reliability of predictions, 2,000 people will have to be incarcerated to prevent one murder. At worst, that figure rises to 5,000.  His numbers give a hint of why New Labour has aroused unanimous contempt. It is pandering to the prejudice the police at Parliament displayed: the inchoate fear that the mentally ill are one message from God away from exploding with wild rage. It's a lie, as Ministers should know. The Department of Health established in 1999 that of the 550 or so homicides in England and Wales each year, about 20 are committed by people with a psychosis. It is safer, much safer, to walk unaccompanied through a psychiatric hospital than pass a pub. But the Government is not proposing the internment of drunks. It is merrily feeding the fear that the 630,000 mentally ill people in Britain are unexploded bombs.  Everyone is blaming gesture politicians for the coming authoritarianism. Jack Straw, a master of the debased art, promised to get tough after Michael Stone was found guilty the horrible murders of Lyn and Megan Russell. Stone's conviction is not to be trusted. Without forensic evidence, the prosecution relied on the tainted testimony of prisoners who said Stone confessed to them while on remand. One admitted taking money from the tabloids. A second forced a retrial when he admitted lying under oath. We may one day have the bitterly comic knowledge that the greatest change in mental health law in a century was inspired by a miscarriage of justice. Yet the joke is also on at least a few of the Government's critics.  Western cultures are saturated with counsellors. When granted prosperity, a substantial minority responded not by helping others or creating works of value and permanence, but by ejaculating a geyser of selfish tears about their trivial woes. Their belief that the human condition could be reclassified as a sickness and cured by buying pills and conversations with strangers was indulged by the mental health industry which ballooned on the proceeds of egoism.  The best example of the imperial claims of psychiatry is the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM), the 'bible' of the American Psychiatric Association - and many psychiatrists around the world. It has disorders for each and every one of us. Herb Kutchins and Stuart A. Kirk, two sceptical American academics, showed how the DSM has turned everyday behaviour into profitable illnesses. A busy executive complains she can't sleep (Major Depressive Disorder). A man you last met at school confesses he still has a grudge against you (Paranoid Personality Disorder). A wife says that after 10 years she no longer finds her husband the raging stud he once was (Hypoactive Sexual Desire Disorder). A columnist blubs that he can't write a word without 40 Silk Cut and a gallon of coffee by his side (Addictive Personality). Your sister says she can't get her old boyfriend out of her head (Obsessive-Compulsive Personality Disorder). A colleague says he'd rather be on his own than with friends (Schizoid Personality Disorder). This is a limited selection. The DSM's list of disorders runs to 866 pages.  And that's just psychiatry. Phillip Hodson of the British Association for Counselling &amp; Psychotherapy told me there were about 300 competing varieties of therapy in Britain - all offering the promise that they know what is wrong with you. Any fraud or dunce can be a counsellor because, true to form, New Labour refuses to regulate this booming small business sector while tearing up the civil rights of the mentally ill. No one knows how many counsellors are out there. The highest estimate is that there are 200,000 billing unknown millions.  The Government may be more in tune with the solipsism of a country lost in therapy than the therapists who oppose it. To a public which believes every variant of quirkiness or regret is an identifiable illness, the absurd instruction that psychiatrists pick out criminals before they commit a crime sounds feasible. Ignorant desires for something to be done about the negligible threat of mad axemen are themselves a form of selfishness. Politicians who know how to play on insecurity can gratify people who like to think they are ill by stigmatising and bullying people who are all too ill.  When Ministers are asked what they think they're doing, they say, 'trust us. Only a few people will be caught by the new law'. Dr Zigmond doesn't believe them. He predicts an explosion in coercive treatment. What is being proposed is a return to the compulsion of Victorian Britain before the 1890 Lunacy Act limited the random cramming of the eccentric and simple into asylums. At present, one social worker and two doctors must agree before sectioning a citizen. If, for instance, a disturbed man's parents say they can look after him at home, the professionals have the discretion not to section. The Bill removes that discretion. If symptoms persist, it says the man must be taken before a tribunal, which also has no discretion. If he is sent to a hospital, the tribunal can order psychiatrists to keep him in, when doctors agree he has been cured. 'What are we going to do with him then?' Zigmond asks.  Hundreds of thousands may be caught. Suppose you tell a doctor you feel stressed. He prescribes pills. You say you hate the thought of drugs and want a counsellor. The doctor insists. The Bill removes your right to oppose him. You will be compelled to swallow your pride and the recommended treatment.  Those psychiatrists who stay with the profession - many are threatening to retire early - will accelerate the trend to hyper-defensive medicine. There has been a 60 per cent increase in sectioning in the past decade, not, say psychiatrists, because the population has got noticeably madder, but because of the blame culture. Doctors don't get criticised for the 999 patients they keep in, but the one they let out who commits a crime.  With its enormous majority this administration can ignore the protests of the 50 organisations which comprise the Mental Health Alliance. Defeat will be inevitable unless they are prepared to try a bold tactic.  Whitehall wants to give everyone the right to call an NHS trust and insist that its psychiatrists examine a citizen you think is dangerous. The trust can't refuse, and I'm sure rejected lovers and spiteful neighbours will enjoy using this nark's power to the full. The Alliance should warn that it will require the Westminster NHS Trust to examine Tony Blair (Psychotic Delusions of Grandeur), David Blunkett (Explosive Personality Disorder), Alan Milburn (Attention Deficit Disorder), Estelle Morris (Masochistic Personality Disorder) and Gordon Brown (Generalised Anxiety Disorder).  Meanwhile, I must tell my colleagues that I have patented this unbeatable wheeze. My lawyers will defend to the death my sole right to order some wretched shrink to dive into the phobias and paranoias which make up the mind of Alastair Campbell.   Best of Nick Cohen   &lt;A HREF="http://www.observer.co.uk/comment/highlights"" TARGET="_NEW"&gt;www.observer.co.uk/comment/highlights