The class hatred of firefighters burns as brightly as ever. In the past few days the people who risk their lives to save your lives have been variously described as: blackmailers demanding 'Danegeld' (London Evening Standard); 'a gang of kidnappers' crying 'Pay up or the kid gets it' (Sunday Telegraph); and 'stubborn', 'bloody-minded' traitors who are happy to run the risk that 'squaddies could die in Iraq' because they are missing training while covering for the strikers (the Sun). Respectable people must on no account allow these criminals into their homes - even if they are on fire. The screeches of very well-paid hacks have been joined by the sombre warnings of 'Steady' Eddie George. The Governor of the Bank of England presents himself as unflappable and independent: the antithesis of the hirelings of the media. When he said on 17 November that giving in to the fire officers would lead to inflation and unemployment, he expected to be treated seriously. Last week he was at it again as he warned MPs that firefighters threatened to detonate a pay 'explosion' which would cause a 'a generalised push on inflation'.  The explosion which may have taken out your pension and may soon take out your job was the explosion of the hi-tech share market. The collapse of the greatest bubble in the history of capitalism wiped 40 per cent off the value of London shares. There are good grounds for believing that more losses are on the way. The bubble's growth and collapse followed a classic pattern. As in every capitalist crisis, from the Dutch Tulipmania of seventeenth century on, as soon as the bubble inflated it became sane to be insane, profitable to be profligate. Sensible investors such as Tony Dye, the manager of the Phillips &amp; Drew fund, warned that shares in dotcoms, telecoms and media were fantastically overvalued. He refused to touch them. For being right, he was ridiculed as 'Dr Doom'. In 1999, The Times said he was a 'laughing stock' and he was driven from his job a few months later.  His treatment made a perverted sense. Being right in a bubble is the worst investment strategy a speculator can follow. If he didn't have dotcom shares, he couldn't capitalise on the mania. And mania is the only word to describe the riot of delusion and fraud which bubbles ferment. History may not repeat itself, but bubbles nearly always follow the same pattern. They are sparked by an invention that promises unquantifiable rewards. Diving technology, which held out the hope of retrieving treasure from wrecks, preceded the South Sea Bubble of 1720. The car, aviation and cinema industries powered the 1920s bull market whose collapse produced depression and fascism. In the 1990s it was the internet.  As shares rise, more investors pile in. Euphoria takes hold as shares rise further. Theories are invented to justify prices which bear no relation to the value of companies. 'The New Economy' of the 1990s, with its promise of increased productivity and the limitless possibility for e-commerce, was probably the best example ever of self-serving economic Utopianism.  The finest minds can be swept along by bubble dementia. Isaac Newton bought shares in the South Sea Company, the Enron of its day. He sold at a profit and said he could understand the motions of the planets but not the madness of mankind. The sight of others making fortunes in weeks as the South Sea stock powered upwards was, however, too much for the great scientist. He dived back in and was wiped out. For the rest of his life he refused to allow the words 'South Sea' to be uttered in his presence.  The only institution that can stop a bubble producing a calamity for society is the government. From the South Sea Company, which gave shares to George I, his mistresses and London's Whig Oligarchy, to Enron, which funded Republicans and Democrats, Tories and Blairites with bi-partisan liberality, corrupt companies have always wanted to square politicians. Enron understood the realities of political power better than the anti-capitalist movement, which was at its crassest when it maintained that corporations were stronger than governments. A corporation is just a hierarchical association for the production of profit. It cannot raise armies or levy taxes. Governments have the power to turn very nasty. They can increase interest rates, tax share dealings and investigate and punish the frauds which flourish in all market manias. Above all, they can warn the public it will be fleeced when the make-believe world falls apart.  Unsteady Eddie did none of the above. Instead, he pumped the market higher. In December 1999, just before the crash, he announced that hi-tech stocks 'provide a better underpinning of equity values than perhaps has been appreciated'. In other words, dotcom shares were solid investments which were, if anything, undervalued. The financial press took his praise as an endorsement for shares the prices of which seemed able to rise for ever. But I suppose puncturing a bubble is a tougher task than opposing firemen. Instead of keeping the workers in their place, you have to confront the City.  George was not alone in his insouciance. New Labour was a product of the bubble. Blair's advisers gibbered about a coming weightless world in which the economy dematerialised and we 'lived on thin air', working for the new knowledge industries. Peter Mandelson promised that Britain would have 'the best environment in the world for electronic trading'. Blair and Gordon Brown were as enthusiastic. The Labour Party, which ought to have imbibed suspicion of the destructive power of capitalism at its mother's teat, became a true believer in the markets at the moment when they were preparing to go haywire.  Jon Cruddas, Labour MP for Dagenham, told me 'New Economy' fantasies were everywhere in Downing Street. He ought to know: he was Blair's adviser in Number 10 on relations with the trade unions from 1997 to 2001. New Economy hysteria, he said, allowed the party to believe it didn't have to bother with manufacturing industry and the working class - both were heading to the dustbin of history. There was no need to worry about trade unions - they would no longer be necessary as we were all going to be freelance surfers in cyberspace. Regulation was as pointless - it would destroy the marvellous creativity of capitalism.  To date, the political class has been lucky to escape a reckoning. Whether it will get away unscathed for much longer depends on how the economy holds up. If you believe the pessimists, the chances of avoiding a slump are slim. In one respect only the Government is already being punished. What George and the rest are saying is that workers must hold down their wages as the crash pushes the country towards recession. They must pick up the bill for a party to which they weren't invited. Not unnaturally, they can't see why they should.