Four facts are rarely mentioned when Fleet and Downing Streets incite hatred of asylum-seekers. The list begins with the easily checkable assertion that Britain has not been swamped with refugees, genuine or otherwise, when our figures are compared with other countries, particularly in the Third World. The reason why those who cannot prove that they have a justifiable fear of persecution are not being deported has everything to do with a decision by the Home Office in 1996, on Ann Widdecombe's myopic watch, to pay Siemens to deliver a spanking new computer system to process applications. Despite the loss of skip-loads of public money, the techno-wizards, who brought us the Passport Office fiasco, have yet to do anything as clever as providing terminals that work. Widdecombe's and Jack Straw's condemnations of the 'bogus' and 'abusive' serve the useful purpose of distracting attention from official incompetence. Both occasionally remember to insert the cooing caveat: 'But, of course, we have nothing against genuine refugees. We welcome them to these islands today as we always have in the past.'  Neither they nor chunks of the press can therefore acknowledge our third unhelpful point - as of 1 April, it will be impossible for a refugee to reach Britain legally. The owners of planes, trains, automobiles, lorries, vans, camper vans, caravans, motorbike sidecars and tandems with a spare seat will be fined £2,000 if they carry a genuine refugee or economic migrant across the Channel. (The new law makes no distinction.) Asylum-seekers are, quite deliberately, being pushed into the hands of the people-smuggling rackets and will then - QED ! - be branded as criminals themselves by association.  The hatred of foreign beggars that causes editors and columnists to fleck their readers with spittle requires the suppression of the fourth and, in many ways, nastiest item on the list. Their invective deploys a sub-literary conceit, a self-pitying inversion which turns victims into persecutors and the comfortable into the oppressed. Beggars must be shown as con-artists. They grab fortunes that dot.com founders would envy from a decent but cozened public.  The rhetorical effect is spoilt if we add that Straw prevents asylum-seekers from working and is forcing them to live on vouchers and pocket money with a combined value which comes in at 30 per cent below the lowest level of income support.  A single man must survive on £25-worth of Home Office food vouchers, known as 'Asylos' to despairing human rights workers, and £10 cash a week. This paltry income is too lavish for Straw and the supermarkets. In front of me is a memo from Sainsbury's management team to its check-out boys and girls. Sainsbury's instructs the staff that asylum seekers can't spend their Asylos freely. The tokens can only be used to buy 'stated' goods - 'eg grocery items, toiletries, nappies. Tokens cannot be exchanged for cash and no change can be given on them.' If a mother buys baby food worth £4.51 with a £5 Asylo, Sainsbury's will keep the difference.  Blair's favourite supermarket has inspired policy-makers. The Home Office has realised that the arrival of the Asylo is an exciting opening for business. It has given Sodexho Pass, a French company, the right to distribute the vouchers. The corporation's marketing department is telling stores there are profits to be made from pocketing the change. 'Don't miss this revenue-making opportunity,' its publicity all but shouts.  Sainsbury's and the Home Office's lucky business partners are practising the modern equivalent of stealing pennies from blind men's cups. I can, nevertheless, hear the thick-skinned mutter: 'So what?' Asylum-seekers have come here willingly. About two-thirds of them could be told to leave when, if ever, the decrepit Home Office bureaucracy manages to deal with their cases. If the rest are really running for their lives, Blair's and Brown's penny-pinching must be preferable to a bullet in the head from the secret police back home.  Be careful before you imitate the snorts of the hard nosed. My wise colleague Neal Ascherson once warned that you should always keep a keen eye on how the Government treats asylum- seekers because it shows how they would deal with the rest of us if it thought it could get away with it.  Last week, as one wing of the Home Office was getting ready to close the ports to authentic refugees, another announced that uppity natives should be treated with greater severity than the most pathetic foreigner. Any petty offender who breaks a probation order twice, or a community service order, or an order to stop taking drugs, or any other kind of order, will be sent back to court to face an automatic punishment of up to three months in prison. Harry Fletcher, the spokesman for the probation officers' union, Napo, said that a breach of an order might be being late for an appointment.  When concerns about the already enormous prison population shooting upwards are put to the terrifying Paul Boateng, his face shines with macho gullibility. 'That's their choice,' snaps the Home Office Minister.  Fletcher is astonished that Boateng neither knows nor cares that the majority of offenders in prisons or probation hostels are unlikely to behave rationally. They are mentally ill or the victims of child abuse, or are so undereducated that they are not qualified to take the most menial work. (It says much about our public sector that the first civil servant most offenders meet who can do a passable job isn't a teacher or social worker, but the prison officer who locks them up.)  If they escape a jail sentence, they will lose half and in many cases all of their benefits. Alistair Darling, the Trot-turned-Blairite Social Security Secretary, is modestly proposing in his Child Support, Pensions and Social Security Bill to impoverish all accused of breaking a court order. New Labour has no time for the dated concept that a man is innocent until proved guilty. The mere charge will be enough to slash income and, presumably, leave the suspect with thieving or begging at the top of his list of ideas for staying alive. So much for being tough on the causes of crime.  What is shocking about Darling's law is its class bias. A nice, middle-class person (such as your correspondent) will not have his wages docked by the state if he breaks a court order not to engage in behaviour likely to cause a breach of the peace in the presence of the Prime Minister. We will be fine. Only the poor will suffer .  They will be 'bogus' asylum-seekers in their own land.  As we report on our news pages, Robin Cook and Peter Hain, his Foreign Office junior, are behaving rather bravely. They are letting it be known that they oppose what amounts to a sustained attack on the press over the David Shayler debacle.  I wrote last week about The Observer and our sister paper, the Guardian, being hauled off to the Old Bailey. The Guardian 's crime was to publish a letter from Shayler. MI5 said it was absolutely vital to get the original as evidence against its renegade spy. (Apparently, the case against him was so weak, the spooks couldn't claim he had broken the Official Secrets Act until they saw his contribution to a letters page.) My colleague, Martin Bright, was ordered to hand over notes, if notes exist, about a story he wrote about Shayler naming the names of MI6 officers who certainly knew about, and may have given money to, plotters trying to overthrow Gadaffi.  The judge ordered us to comply with the spies' demands. At no point did he recognise, even in passing, that a free press must scrutinise government and that the only way we can do this - however inadequately - is to assure readers that a whimsical secret police will not be able to leaf through our notebooks and browse through our computer systems (which they'd also like to do) after you have spoken to us in confidence. We are challenging the order.  Hain is the Minister responsible for Libya. He is horrified by what is happening: in part because he's a South African who suffered from the attentions of Boss, the 'intelligence community' of the white dictatorship; in part because he wasn't told about the court action. Cook, meanwhile, is protesting in the strongest language behind the scenes. Jack Straw, I'd guess, is his main target. This criminal investigation is being run out of the Home Office, MI5's nominal controllers, and all our inquiries are referred to its press office.  Both are courageous because Shayler's most damning revelation was that MI5 keeps files on politicians. American Presidents allowed J. Edgar Hoover to run the FBI as a private army which ignored the Mafia and hounded Martin Luther King. They knew Hoover had files on them, and guessed that if they checked him all kinds of dirt would appear. Cook and Hain must have some nagging fears themselves. (Who wouldn't?) That they still behave like democrats is very much to their credit.  They may be influenced by the absurdity of what is going on. Half of the print and broadcast media could be drawn into this in the run-up to a general election. While The Observer and Guardian are up before the courts for printing pretty innocuous pieces, a history of MI6 is arriving at the bookshops. MI6: Fifty Years of Special Operation (Fourth Estate, £25) is a corking read which I urge you to buy while you can. The author, Stephen Dorrill, names agents and shows how MI6 lied to successive Foreign Secretaries. At one point he identifies the MI6 officers involved in a plan to assassinate Slobbo Milosevic.  I asked him if he was worried about his book being banned? Well, naturally he was, in the present climate. But he maintained that every fact he quoted and spy he named has been published before in newspapers, specialist journals or on the Internet. What he has done is pull it all together.  The Internet Blair worships renders futile the cloaking of the bungling and sinister behind the Official Secrets Act. As the stars of the X Files , who are far more credible investigators than the security services, know: the truth is out there - on www.shayler.com, to be precise.