Ask "Anton" – not his real name – where he would be now, were he not in his second year at university studying criminology, and the answer comes back without hesitation. "Prison." That hardly seems an exaggeration. Excluded from school no fewer than 10 times, remanded in custody at least once, he was, he says, becoming steadily more involved in gang life, caught up in "robberies, theft, fighting people". It was clear where things were heading. "They asbo'd me from my area," he recalls, but that had little deterrent effect. "I didn't mind going to prison," Anton says. "That's where all the Gs [gangsters] were. I wanted to be like them, they were my idols." Yet now he sits across a table from me in the cluttered basement of a law office in west London, not as a client awaiting trial but as a would-be lawyer, a student and a youth ambassador for a truly remarkable organisation: Just for Kids Law , chosen by the Guardian as one of the eight charities helping disadvantaged teenagers and young adults that will benefit from its 2011 Christmas appeal. He's in the office regularly now, hoping to get a work placement and eventually become a full-time lawyer with the organisation. His ambition is to do what they do: fight for people between the ages of 10 and 21 who seem all out of chances. People like "Helen" – again, not her real name. This Christmas will mark the first anniversary of her arrival in Britain, after a long, perilous journey from Eritrea aged just 16. She is a shy, diffident girl, hiding behind a fringe of hair, who came here without friends, family or so much as a single contact in the country – truly a stranger in a strange land. When she begins to recall the journey to Britain, on a lorry, her face seizes up with fear. The lawyer assigned by the immigration authorities put her in touch with JfK Law. The charity, in turn, introduced her to Sabine, who set about finding Helen a place to live and study. Sabine acted as Helen's advocate with the authorities when she was being bullied in her house and later became homeless, acting for her again when she had so little money that she had no warm clothes to wear. Helen is getting on well at school now, with ambitions to study medicine. And, when she feels lonely, she can talk to Jojo, the volunteer mentor JfK Law found for her. "I feel like I have family now," she says. She'll be spending Christmas with Jojo, doubtless playing football with her two young sons, she adds with a smile. What the founders of JfK Law understood was that when faced with the Kafka-esque bureaucracy of housing, social security or education departments, people, and especially young people, need an advocate – ideally knowledgeable in law. Lawyers won't be fobbed off by a housing department, for example, because they know chapter and verse what the Children's Act says about the provision of housing for a child in need. So when they fight, they often win. The need for a skilled defender is greater still for those with learning disabilities – the specialist area of JfK Law co-founder Shauneen Lambe, whose early career was spent fighting death row cases in the US alongside campaigning lawyer Clive Stafford-Smith. Now, when Lambe represents a young person, the first question she asks is, "Do you have a special educational need?" Eighty-five per cent of those she works with have been excluded from mainstream education, often dismissed as impossible when really they have a disability that had never been picked up. Much of JfK Law's work is devoted to people such as Anton who get caught up in the criminal justice system and need to be defended. The crucial thing is to get involved in the process early, says the organisation's co-founder Aika Stephenson, who began her career working in a young offenders institution. "I would see 15-year-olds coming in suicidal; they would be traumatised when they arrived." Charged but not convicted, many would be remanded in custody – and that was where the damage was done. "They come in very vulnerable, wanting their mum – and the other prisoners sense that. They start bullying them. Within two days, they'd have a different mask on their face," says Stephenson. They would harden themselves to survive. "Once they'd cut off their emotions, I could see they'd be capable of committing more crime." In other words, a child who might be innocent would – by the very process of being charged and detained – turn into a criminal. So JfK Law intervenes before it's too late, providing those services no ordinary lawyer ever would – be it arranging driving lessons, helping draft a CV or even, in one case, paying for beds for two teenage clients to sleep on after their mother's request for a crisis loan from social services was rejected. Such help is essential, says JfK Law, because of the harsh lives these young people endure, often growing up surrounded by alcohol and drug abuse and witnessing the most distressing domestic violence. Does this make Just for Kids Law a bleeding heart operation, lavishing attention on young criminals? Lambe and Stephenson are more hard-headed than that. They cite the statistic that a child excluded from school and set on the wrong path can go on to cost the taxpayer £460,000 over a lifetime. "Prevention," says Lambe, "is so much more cost-effective than cure." But don't take their word for it. Listen to Anton. Just for Kids Law found a mentor for him who convinced the school to give him one more go. Next they found things for him to do, even giving him work as a waiter at a JfK Law event, showing him that there was a way to get money that did not involve stealing. Step by step, month by month, they motivated him to return to his studies, to believe he might even have a career. He says: "For the first time in my life, I can actually see a future."