He knew what he had to do. Tony Blair entered the arena where, by his own admission, Labour's "journey to government began" - the Bournemouth conference centre where Neil Kinnock famously faced down the Militant Tendency nearly 20 years ago - with a clear mission. He had to restore a bond of trust with a party and country that had been badly frayed by war; to renew a government that, six-and-a-half years on, seemed to be drifting; and to strangle at birth the current, and increasing, talk of a challenge to his leadership.  Of course, no prime minister, however nimble, could do all that in a single speech: it is one of the delusions of our political culture that we expect an hour of talk to change the world. But yesterday was Blair's chance to make a start.  How did he do? The uninspiring truth is that he probably did all right. He delivered an adequate speech, doing just enough to winch him out of this week's hole. But major addresses are judged not solely on their immediate reception, but on how they look a week, a month or even a year later. Held to that standard, this one is unlikely to shine for long. Earlier Blair efforts had crackled with electricity; this one barely caught fire.  Take the three tasks that confronted him. On the case for war in Iraq, the PM was weak. He repeated the same arguments he had made in February - about the intelligence crossing his desk and the duty of a leader to take the toughest decisions - but they failed to persuade then, and they were hardly more potent yesterday. Still, that was softened by Blair's studied show of humility, his recognition that people were "disappointed, hurt, angry", and, later, by his apparent choking back of tears as he recalled the letters he'd received from bereaved parents of British soldiers.  As for his own trustworthiness, he was airily dismissive of the questions that have bubbled out of the Kelly affair and been pored over by the Hutton inquiry. These, he implied, were part of the "daily diet of froth... an endless who knew what, when, as if politicians simply competed on villainy." The delegates did not argue. There were no 1985-style walkouts or barracking. His comments on Iraq were greeted instead with sustained applause; not from everyone in the hall, but enough people anxious to send the media a message: we still back him, so bog off.  As for recharging an administration that seemed low on batteries even before the war, he did OK. The warm-up slide show, counting off Labour's concrete and admirable achievements in government, had buoyed spirits before he walked in, leaving Blair to explain how the policy laundry list cohered into a whole. He did his best, offering equal citizenship, collective solidarity, meritocracy and mutual respect as his core New Labour values. But, for that passage at least, his audience remained unmoved.  This is a problem that will not go away for Tony Blair. Conference after conference, he tries to find the red thread that might link together his government's deeds, turning them into something greater. And each year it eludes him. As he put it: "I've been trying to say this to you for the best part of 10 years but never quite found the words."  Perhaps the greatest proof of this frustration, and the worst part of the speech, was his promise to solve the problem by staging "the biggest policy consultation ever to have taken place in this country". The government is to publish a prospectus; ministers and MPs will then fan out across the country to engage the "whole community" in discussion of the "challenges" and "real choices" that lie ahead.  The heart sinks. It's not that a national conversation is not a laudable goal: it's a wonderful idea. But this exercise reeks of contrivance and even desperation. It recalls the post-1997 stunt the Tories called Listening to Britain. It has come to something when Tony Blair is taking a leaf out of a book written by William Hague - and what would happen if the public came up with an idea at odds with government policy? To cave in would be to undermine Blair's talk of "leadership".  So the PM failed once again to make his party see the logic which to him is so blindingly obvious: that everything he does is in harmony with Labour's founding ideals - even when it looks like a complete violation of them. He tries and tries to make them see it, swearing that he is "angry" in his zeal to change the country - and it works for that moment and even for the rest of the day. He gets his long ovation. But somehow it does not lodge. Why not?  The last two days may have finally supplied an answer to that conundrum. For while Blair made, and makes, a cogent, cerebral case for his New Labourism, Gordon Brown had the previous day approached the same task - anchoring current policy in old time ideals - via a different route. The PM appealed to delegates' minds. The chancellor aimed direct at their hearts and guts.  His appeal on Monday was all emotion: talking of a party that needs "not just a programme but a soul", a movement called to "larger and noble purposes". Delegates lapped all that up, enjoying every one of his 60 invocations of the word "Labour." If Blair has always known how to press the buttons of the wider, Middle British electorate, Brown has always known his way around the erogenous zones of the Labour party.  Which brings us to the leadership question. There is no getting away from it: Monday and Tuesday's speeches were opposing shots in a duel between Blair and Brown. Coded, of course, but shots all the same. Brown's salvos were numerous, whether pointedly refusing to endorse the justness of the war on Iraq, warning against "power for power's sake" or insisting on the need for greater clarity of governmental purpose.  Blair hit back his own way, failing even to mention his chancellor (for perhaps the first time in a conference speech) and insisting that the leadership he offers is the only one worth having. That soundbite about having no "reverse gear" - Blair's own version of "the Lady's not for turning" - was partly aimed at Brown, according to one ultra-loyal minister." He was saying: "Gordon, you crowd-please if you want to. I'm going to change the country." The chancellor's digs at Blair were no accident either. "Every line in there was deliberate," said one Brown loyalist.  Blair will get more attention for his speech; that comes with the job. And he will be pleased with a couple of side gains that yesterday brought him: he somehow managed to persuade a Labour conference to applaud the deporting of rejected asylum seekers without "judicial interference" and the introduction of ID cards, illiberal measures both. But it will be Brown's address that lives on in the viscera of the Labour faithful. And since it is this group, not the country, which ultimately decides who leads the Labour party, that fact may well rumble on long after the Bournemouth sunshine is but a memory.  ·  