The knives remain sharp but unbloodied. A lunchtime adrenaline rush suggested there might be some gore on the Westminster carpet by the afternoon, but in the end Stephen Byers disappointed the bloodhounds. There was no dramatic resignation speech; just another wearying statement delivered in the familiar Byers monotone - in which he uttered his trademark, Mogadon phrase: "I made it clear" perhaps a dozen times - as he vowed to continue as secretary of state for transport, local government and the regions.  He will probably limp on for the moment; Downing Street has not yet lost patience. But there will be no cheers for Byers the Survivor, just as there would have been few tears if he had reached for the metaphorical revolver yesterday.  That's not because of the specific charges bubbling away over the Jo Moore/Martin Sixsmith affair. The two warring sides have so blinded the public with claim and counter claim that few civilians outside the Westminster village could state with certainty what the minister is accused of - let alone what he has actually done.  It is damaging, to be sure, that his version of events directly clashes with Sixsmith's (and it hardly helps the minister that his accuser is not a faceless bureaucrat but a former BBC TV Moscow correspondent remembered, and probably trusted, by the public). But the rap sheet shrinks to two points. First, Byers's apparent denial that he had any role in the Sixsmith sacking: yesterday he semi-apologised for - or "clarified" - that false impression. Second, the minister's original announcement that his chief press officer had resigned when he had only agreed to resign. Byers will hope his apology deals with the first count, and that the second is too narrow and technical to be a career-breaker.  So this affair is not, in itself, likely to be a resigning matter. Nevertheless the axe hovers over Byers, ready to fall in the summer reshuffle if not before. The explanation for his vulnerability says much about him and his famously troubled department, but also about the entire New Labour project.  The most obvious source of the minister's weakness is his record in a department even Downing Street describes as "dysfunctional". The DTLR has become the Maff of our times - home of some of the most intractable problems in British life, from a railway broken through lack of investment to a choked road network to an air traffic control system gasping for cash. It would be a hard job for anyone to do well, but Stephen Byers has not convinced voters he even understands the scale of the problem let alone offers a solution.  Part of the reason for that relates to the current rumpus. The spin doctor's handbook rules that any press adviser must resign as soon as he or she becomes the story (Jo Moore can't have received her copy, otherwise she would have gone after her notorious September 11 memo.) A similar rule applies to ministers. Once their own personal travails obscure all other business, they can no longer function.  That was the brute reality which ejected Peter Mandelson not once but twice: he could not serve as a cabinet minister if his every press conference or interview was dominated by questions about Notting Hill property prices or the Hinduja brothers. Stephen Byers is fast reaching that point - as yesterday neatly proved. As Byers sweated in the Commons, Ken Livingstone was unveiling his congestion charge scheme for London, the most ambitious and controversial project of its kind anywhere in the world. The Conservatives want the government to block it. But what was the transport secretary debating in parliament? The internal memos of his press office.  Even these troubles could be survivable. A different minister might insist that the press flap would eventually pass and that, once it had, he would get back to his admittedly demanding job. But not Stephen Byers. His problem goes deeper.  For he has no political ballast to keep him afloat. He has no constituency of support, no powerbase in the party or country ready to defend him from the media and Tory vultures circling overhead. Have you seen the hordes of Labour MPs and activists queuing up to defend their beleaguered brother? They're not there.  And that's because Byers is the very model of the New Labour man. From his rimless glasses to his droning delivery, he emerged soon after the 1997 landslide as the archetypal Blairite robot; mechanically repeating the Millbank soundbite of the day. He buried his Bennite past in the Tyneside Labour party - purging himself of the Steve Byers of 1980s militancy - and became the perfect, Blairite mini-me. More than any other, he seemed to embody the New Labour ambition to drain the politics out of politics, offering instead a sensible, technocratic promise of competence. Ideology was out, management was in.  But that approach comes at a price. For managerialism only works if you're a good manager. New Labour's deal with the electorate was to shed the politics and run the trains on time. But if the trains are still late, that leaves little argument for keeping the party, or its transport minister, in office.  Before New Labour, politicians had other arguments to fall back on besides stainless-steel efficiency. They might be flawed or make mistakes, but they were pursuing a plan or vision that inspired others to stick with them. Some ministers are still like that: if civil servants were squabbling in Clare Short's department, the Labour tribe would be loudly defending her. But there is no Byers political flag for the faithful to rally around - and New Labour risks the same problem.  Of course, the government deny that. Even in the latest row they claim there is a principle at stake - the belief that civil servants should serve the elected government, whether they agree with its policies or not. They suggest Sixsmith was violating that hallowed principle. There was a time when Labour supporters did indeed believe that permanently-Tory Whitehall was out to thwart Labour's socialist dreams. But few buy that as a description of today's landscape.  Nor are they convinced by the belated attempt to graft some politics on to the Byers android. Like the Tin Man who wished he "only had a heart", the minister's allies try to show off his traditional Labour credentials, citing his decision to bring Railtrack back into public ownership. Traditionalists also liked his branding of the third way as "flaky" - but it was too late to rescue Byers from his bloodless persona. And the one decision which might have given him colour and his own Labour following - facing down Gordon Brown and blocking the part privatisation of the London Underground - he never took. In fact, his approval of PPP for the tube cancelled out whatever credit he gained over Railtrack.  So Stephen Byers will surely not survive for long. And when he goes his passing will mark a milestone in the journey of New Labour. For it will send the message that robotic loyalty and technocratic blandness can only carry you so far. True success in politics requires ideas, passion and the ability to stir the public heart. Stephen Byers has none of those qualities. The tougher question is: does New Labour?