Labour is becoming the party of parallel universes. In one realm, the world of their own imagination, they are left-wing heroes, still embarked on the long Labour crusade for social justice. Their weaponry may have changed, but their cause is unchanged.  In the parallel universe, a place the crude might refer to as the real world, they are beginning to look like the exact opposite: they are not the heirs of past Labour struggles, but traitors to them. They are not defending their long-held beliefs, but actively undermining them. The most damning piece of evidence is the plan Labour itself brands as its big idea: the opening up of public services to the private sector.  To New Labour, this bold innovation is the next phase of the struggle begun by Keir Hardie and advanced by Nye Bevan. Its goal is the holiest possible mission: "the last chance to save the public services."  This is what they believe, a philosophy articulated best by Gordon Brown and his team. Britain's schools and hospitals, after years of decay, will at last get the money to function properly. The leaky roofs and overcrowded corridors will be gone, thanks to Labour's 10-year programme of renewal. But this renovation cannot afford to fail.  If Britain's public services are still regarded as disaster zones in 2005 - after two terms of a government which believes in them - then voters will simply give up on the whole business. They will decide that the very idea of the state as an agent of good is a busted flush. They will banish the public ideal once and for all, rejecting it as a nice theory which can never work in practice - ejecting the Labour government along with it.  In its place will come a Conservative regime bent on wholesale privatisation - transforming the parts Thatcherism couldn't reach: education, health, the lot. All that will be left will be a libertarian rump, the state's role confined to policing and defence. Everything else will be privatised.  You can see the outlines of the masterplan already, helpfully sketched by the Tories' Treasury number two Oliver Letwin. His plan to lop £20bn off public spending reveals the Tories' true intent: to shrink the state from its current 40% to just 35%, relative to GDP.  Only Labour can avert this terrible fate. It cannot take the risk of chucking gobs of money at the NHS and state schools - for what if the money doesn't work? This, remember, is the last chance. So "reform" is needed, which means better management. The public sector turns out great teachers, doctors and nurses - but it's never got the hang of management. It's time to call 999: send for the private sector.  They will have the administrative nous public services have so sorely lacked. They will turn around British education and health, making it sparkle by 2005. The voters will cheer, realising that public can work after all. They will banish the Tories, with all their anti-public, commercial values, into oblivion. Labour will be re-elected - and the dream of Attlee and Bevan will be safe for the 21st century.  Persuasive, isn't it? That's how the universe looks from Planet Brown. And, when you visit, it's easy to get carried away with the excitement. It all makes such perfect, internally coherent sense. The air is different there; you start breathing faster.  But, as you leave and re-enter the atmosphere, a different thought takes hold. Suddenly you realise what Labour is actually advocating. They, and not the Tories, are seeking a mandate on June 7 to do what the Conservatives never dared: to introduce private companies into the inner sanctum of the public realm, the NHS and state schools.  That shift is so bizarre it can take a while to take it in. Indeed, it may be the sheer weirdness of the turnaround that has prevented, so far, any outcry. It's as if the electorate has been stunned into silence - with Labour supporters rendered utterly mute with disbelief.  So it took nearly a week for Newsnight to herd Alan Milburn into a TV studio to debate the Labour manifesto with Liam Fox. When they did, on Monday night, they produced a surreal moment of television. For, though they pretended to denounce and insult each other, they were in fundamental agreement.  There should be no ideological dogmas, said Fox: whoever can provide a service should provide it. Milburn had to nod; he had said the exact same thing a moment earlier. As the camera went from one man to the other, the viewer could not help but repeat the queasy observation of George Orwell's Animal Farm. "The creatures outside looked from pig to man, and from man to pig, and from pig to man again; but already it was impossible to say which was which."  Now Labour, who fought four elections warning that the Conservatives would privatise the NHS, seem bent on doing the job themselves. Was the Booth family right when, as we learn from this month's Talk magazine, it greeted the news of their daughter's engagement to Tony Blair with a cry of "Oh no! Cherie's marrying a Tory!"?  The truth might be more unnerving than that. For New Labour refuses to see this as an abandonment of its values. It genuinely believes it is keeping the Labour flame alive for the next generation. They do not realise that their argument boils down to this: we must privatise these services - otherwise they will be privatised. We must bomb the village to save it.  They have a defence, of course. They note the huge distinction between the provision of a service - which can be public or private - and the funding of it, which will still come from the state's coffers and not the individual's pocket. Tories would privatise the lot, making people pay for their kids' schooling or their own treatment. Labour is tinkering only with the mundane business of delivery.  But this is naive or disingenuous or both. It's naive to imagine private companies would not immediately look for ways to cut corners and boost their profits. That's not because they are evil people. It's because they are private companies: making profits is what they exist to do. The private sector will not conform to public values. It makes its decisions according to different criteria: money, not safety or service.  So when cabinet ministers talk about the "management efficiencies" new contractors will be able to make, they must realise what these will be: cutting the wages and conditions of staff or cutting corners on service.  Ministers must know that, unless they sincerely believe private managers are wizards capable of conjuring savings the public sector dullards never spotted. New Labour continues to see in the corporate world strengths the rest of us cannot. They still see titans of efficiency, leanness and discipline, while we see Railtrack and Marks &amp; Spencer.  We will complain about it, of course, when it happens. But Labour will say that they have won a mandate for this policy, even though it will have been barely discussed. That's how they will see their coming victory, differently from the rest of us. It's no surprise. They live in their very own world.