So here's the deal. New Labour has lost interest in a new politics in which a progressive coalition with the Lib Dems is created by proportional representation; the battle to include a manifesto commitment to a referendum on PR in the next parliament has been lost. It had no champions and powerful enemies.  But there is an important potential quid pro quo. There promises to be a compensating commitment to establish elected assemblies for the English regions if supported by regional referendums, with a voting system modelled on London's, where a form of PR is used to top up the assembly's numbers. The new politics will be piloted in the new regional capitals, cities such as Leeds, Newcastle, Birmingham, Bristol, Manchester and Norwich.  Regionalism is not where you would first look for votes or even policy innovation, or so most London-based commentators instinctively feel. You either need a big idea or some eyecatching national policy - selling council houses or slashing taxes - if you want to cut a political dash. Wrong.  Britain and England have been subtly changing for more than 15 years, and there are the first signs of a new self-confidence in our regions and regional cities, together with an appetite for tackling their problems locally. Labour, with its powerful political base in precisely these areas, has been quick and astute enough to identity the change. This is a party and government that moves cautiously - behind public opinion if it can - so if it recognises a new support for regional politics, be sure its antennae have detected something stirring.  In the 1980s, I spent five years as economic correspondent for Newsnight or, rather, as it sometimes seemed, the economic chronicler of Britain's regional woes under Thatcherism. There seemed no city outside London which did not in one way or another tell the same tale of de-industrialisation, economic decay and social disintegration, with a local political and social élite desperately concerned but unable to do anything as power was increasingly concentrated in Westminster and Whitehall. You couldn't make the same reports today; the economic, social and cultural depression is no longer so ubiquitous.  There remain areas of apparently endemic and irredeemable blight, but there is nowhere which does not have a hot spot of vigorous economic activity with living standards and attitudes that match those of London. Indeed, London itself is desperately polarised with incredible wealth and poverty coexisting in the same boroughs, especially in the north-east and south-east.  What Labour has grasped, partly as a matter of intellectual conviction and partly as a recognition of political reality, is that while national policies of redistribution, reinforcement of public services and encouragement of enterprise go so far they need to be customised to the needs of individual regions. And that the only effective agencies are the people whose fates and loyalties lie with particular cities and regions and who are now beginning to agitate against their political powerlessness.  Economic and social problems vary hugely, even within England. One pressing problem is to establish proper east-west rail links between the North-West and North-East. In the Midlands, where 60 per cent of Britain's internationally traded goods are manufactured, the issue is how to grow and sustain a smart manufacturing base to replace ageing and uncompetitive plant. In Yorkshire, Leeds has emerged as a national and regional growth pole; it needs to be supported rather than undermined by the ambitions of its rivals, while Yorkshire itself needs to raise its level of business start-ups and hi-tech presence.  In the South-East, the question is how to balance London's potential destiny as the pre-eminent global city with the needs of the rest of the region. In the South-West and East Anglia, the dominant issue is how to deal with stunning levels of illiteracy and innumeracy. All require regional initiatives where the priorities are importantly different.  This has long been the view of Richard Caborn at the Department of Trade and Industry and Hilary Armstrong at the Department of the Environment, Transport and the Regions. Il capo of English regionalism, John Prescott, has made the case consistently, generally to deaf ears. But for the past three months, the argument has taken off, the most important convert being Gordon Brown. Two weeks ago, he called for a 'Britain of regions and nations with a new dynamism', continuing: 'We are moving from the old Britain of subjects, where people had to look upwards to a Whitehall bureaucracy for their solutions, to a Britain of citizens where, region to region... we are ourselves in charge.'  Brown has come to this view not least because of the economic arguments, set out last week in a paper edited by Ed Balls, chief economic adviser to the Treasury, and John Healy MP, Brown's parliamentary private secretary. Six out of eight English regions have per capita incomes below the European average, writes Balls. National solutions go so far, but real engagement with regional failings must come from the bottom up. If that were successful, then Britain would have more balanced growth and close the productivity gap with its rivals.  Balls wants to build on the eight English Regional Development Agencies already established by Labour, giving them more cash and more flexibility to prioritise what they choose. He accepts they need to be accountable, but the system he, along with the Chancellor, proposes is to use the existing network of regional chambers - a collection of regional notables and local councillors - alongside a new regional committee in the House of Commons. They need to go further and my suspicion is that they already have. By 2004, the RDAs will be spending £1.7 billion between them, a scale of publicly-led investment not seen since the days of the Industrial Reorganisation Corporation in the 1960s and the National Enterprise Board in the 1970s; indeed, RDAs are emerging as New Labour's interventionist arm.  But if accountability and bottom-up engagement are to mean anything, RDAs need to be held to account by their local communities, in other words, elected regional assemblies.  Here, Labour enters a witch's brew of internecine rivalries as powerful regional cities campaign to be the regional capital - Sheffield against Leeds, Manchester against Liverpool, Newcastle versus Sunderland - with the open question being whether there are really any regional loyalties that might underpin the legitimacy of the new assemblies. My view is that Labour has little choice. It wants vigorous RDAs and the demand for accountability and regional political direction is following in their wake. The regional chambers are powerless talking shops. Necessarily they must become elected, reinventing the English regions of the Saxon era - and the manifesto is about to accept that ineluctable logic.  Proportional representation was meant to reinvent British politics, which it would have done, but the march of regionalism is no less significant. New Labour conceives of the assemblies as toothless tigers, but already we know better, as London, Scotland and Wales have proved. We are watching, instead, the quiet and long overdue reinvention of the British state.