It was Napoleon who wished for lucky generals, and every prime minister worth his salt should wish for lucky chancellors. Tony Blair chose well. He has a lucky chancellor - and Wednesday's Budget, with another judicious mix of spending increases and tax cuts, will cap Gordon Brown's four years of charmed fiscal stewardship. It's been a remarkable chancellorship and has transformed Labour's reputation for economic management. But luck sooner or later runs out - and even virtue has its costs.  His luck has been the wider economic context. There has been no world recession; the fallout of the Asian financial crisis was contained - indeed, the world carried on growing, and inflation everywhere has been depressed. Against this benign background Mr Brown's tax receipts have flowed and the British economy carried on performing well.  But if that luck fell to him, he has gone on to make his own. Mr Brown has played his economic management just as he planned in the long dark nights of opposition. The establishment of an independent Bank of England proved a masterstroke; its interest rate policy has been nearly faultless. Other Labour governments have spent in the first two years of a Parliament and endured the next three regretting it; Mr Brown has made his spending increases and tax cuts so they kick in for the next election rather than reward the vote at the last one. He raised taxes by some £17bn in the first two years of his term, and spent less in the first three years than even Margaret Thatcher in her pomp. The result is a stunning fiscal position that Mr Brown has continually underestimated.  Carl Emmerson, of the Institute for Fiscal Studies, calculates that Mr Brown has beaten his own Budget forecasts for the public surplus or deficit in the following year by approaching an average 1% of GDP - a bias any post-war chancellor would envy. It's not that getting the forecast wrong is unusual; it is underestimating it for four consecutive years that is so untypical. The joke about prudence is wearing thin. Mr Brown is so prudent that the financial markets do not believe his forecasts; they factor in a Mr Brown underprediction.  The most extraordinary year was in the spring of 1999 when he forecast he would borrow just £3bn in the following financial year. In the event there was a cash surplus of over £16bn, a swing of some £19bn to the good that is close to a post-war record. The combination of low inflation and consistent repayment of national debt - the best guess is that there will be another £16bn surplus in the current financial year alongside the £22bn of debt repayment financed by the mobile phone spectrum auction - has driven the interest rate on long-term British government debt to an astonishing 4.9 per cent, the lowest in the G7 except Japan and Germany. Britain is becoming the new Switzerland, with the lowest debt and inflation, and the largest budget surplus, in Europe.  Yet still the IMF and the European Commission are not satisfied - in part because they worry that Mr Brown's spending plans over the next three years will fritter away this strength, and in part because the IMF worries that the economy will buckle under the combined weight of private and public spending and reignite inflation - a warning it repeated last week. In particular, it worries that the build-up of capital investment will mean the government may have to borrow to finance capital spending, a position that Mr Brown explicitly permits in his definition of sound fiscal policy (the golden rule) but which offends the new conservative hawks in the US, who argue for permanent balanced budgets as part of their jihad against the state.  The IMF is wrong. Its hyperconservatism takes no account of the powerful disinflationary forces worldwide alongside an emerging surfeit of global productive capacity; the chances of an open economy such as Britain's suffering from a surge in inflation in this context is negligible. The greater risk, given Britain's chronically stretched public services, and a pension structure dependent on high real interest rates, is not spending the cash.  For, while part of Mr Brown's success lies in the strength of the economy and his own crafted strategy, the rest is explained by the Treasury's inability to make sure that the great spending departments actually invest the cash they have been allocated. Mr Brown will avoid mentioning the subject in his Budget speech, confident that the Conservatives are doctrinally unable to attack him, but the government is presiding over a fiscal scandal. It is so inefficient that it has been unable to invest the money allocated to it, so that public investment has sunk to new lows. This is not what Brown intended, but the feebleness of the opposition has prevented the collapse of public investment from becoming a hot political issue. Mr Brown is lucky in every sense.  But perhaps too lucky. Because the government has not decisively reversed the decay in the public infrastructure, and has underspent what it planned, absurdly it is finding itself criticised by the IMF and EU Commission for potentially loosening a fiscal stance that is much tighter than it ever wanted. The baseline against which the government is being judged is just too good. If it had invested the near £10bn that it should have done over the last two years, the result would have been a lower surplus - but still much better than the surplus it actually forecast back in the spring of 1999. Moreover, we would all have begun to see a tangible improvement in the public infrastructure, while the adverse consequences of demand being higher than it was in actuality would have been trivial.  Nor is that all. There is much self-congratulation about how much better Britain has organised its pension system than its principal European competitors. We don't have a generous state pension scheme, as they have, and better still the majority of pensioners, present and future, have saved privately for their old age through their own or company pension schemes. As a result Britain has no impending fiscal crisis about how it is to pay for an ageing population living off generous state pensions.  But there is no such thing as a free lunch. For 20 years private pensions have proved an excellent investment, with annual returns on equity investment averaging 15% alongside high real interest rates; as a result pensioners have been able to buy rich annuities with their highly performing savings. But now the British national debt is falling to some 30% of GDP, carrying long-term interest rates and annuities to new lows. The assumptions on which private pension plans are based are being shredded.  Any pension scheme - private or occupational - that defines a final pension in terms of some relationship to the contributor's final salary is in crisis. Employers who offer these defined benefit schemes are facing breathtaking increases in their contribution rates and thus payroll costs in order to keep their pension funds solvent in this new universe of low annuity rates. Even if they launch a new pension scheme with less generous benefits they face maintaining the solvency of the old fund. Paradoxically, paying off the national debt and fiscal conservatism is proving a payroll tax - via lower annuity rates - on many employers as they raise their contribution rates to their pension fund. Fiscal virtue has unexpected costs; running budget surpluses as large as Mr Brown's is becoming an economic distortion in its own right.  To his credit Mr Brown is fighting the conservatism of the IMF and EU, but even following his own rules will only allow him to 'give away' some £3bn to £4bn. This will be hailed by the City as prudent and by his own supporters, as long as it is crafted to direct money at Labour's core constituency, as a political masterstroke. The other reality - national debt too low and government spending departments chronically unable to raise investment - will be forgotten. But this is a lucky chancellor.