 'There are areas where the private sector has worked well and areas where, as with parts of the railways, it's been a disaster' - thus ran the sentence that won Tony Blair one of the biggest rounds of applause in his conference speech last week. Prime Ministers don't make remarks like that unless they are planning something. Rail, as with the dropping of student loans, promises to be another area where the Government is preparing for a sharp change of policy - and it won't be in the direction of more privatisation and deregulation.  The 'war' against terrorism is proving more than a useful diversionary backdrop to make policy changes that would otherwise be accompanied by a storm of controversy. It is generating a culture in which public action has again become respectable. The ossifying propositions that all the state can do is balance its budget, privatise what it can and leave business to the private sector have been dispelled in less than four weeks. Whether it's George Bush launching the biggest Keynesian reflation for a generation, or Mr Blair promising he will not allow British Airways to go to the wall, the baleful and stultifying consensus that has defined our lives for more than two decades is visibly cracking.  What this means for the railways is still cloudy. The problem is simple to describe. Britain does not have enough capacity to carry even the existing load of rail traffic efficiently and safely. Railtrack, the company charged with lifting investment, has got neither the financial muscle nor managerial competence to undertake even the steady-state investment required to stop deterioration, let alone the major increase promised in the Government's ambitious plans. The Government can proceed as it has, offering ad hoc grants to tide Railtrack through and toughening up regulation - but the realisation is dawning that this will leave a rail service that stands every chance of being as disastrous at the next election as it was at the last.  So what to do? A loose working group of officials and policy advisers from Number 10 and the Department of Transport under the rubric of 'Project Ariel' is trying to decide. The options range from wholesale renationalisation, incorporating the private rail operating companies in the new public company as their licences run out, to the minimalist approach of extending rail franchises to 20 years to encourage more investment, insisting on more transparent and policeable contracts all round but leaving the structure more or less unchanged. And there is the intriguing third way option of transferring Railtrack's assets into a non-profit making trust dedicated to the single aim of investing and modernising the rail infrastructure - not public ownership, but public interest ownership.  As recently as August the betting was that the Government would opt for the minimalist option, but 11 September has opened up the whole debate - not just in terms of political possibility, but in terms of hard economics. The fresh fall in the stock market and further lowering of Railtrack's share price to below £3 has killed any lingering hopes that Railtrack might be able to raise significant share and bond finance to fund rail investment. In any case it lost £534 million last year. With a weaker economy the Government will not be able to raise access charges to help shoulder the burden of financing investment, which it will thus have to bear entirely itself.  Worse still, it is apparent that privatisation is leading to an explosion of costs so that the assumptions on which the 10-year transport plan were made are already history. The upgrade of the west coast line is costing £16 million a mile - three times in real terms what it cost British Rail. The Government had budgeted to provide Railtrack £1 billion a year for steady-state upgrading of the existing network, and up to another billion to extend it - with the rest of the finance being leveraged in via the private sector. Now it faces the bill for every mile of modernised track trebling, and a reduced private sector contribution. In the last six months alone Railtrack has received £2 billion more grant than was budgeted. To get the results the Government wants it will have to write a cumulative cheque to Railtrack of £12 to 15 billion by 2005 - and possibly more.  This is a political impossibility. Taxpayers will not countenance this degree of public grant to a private company paying out - as it must - some £150 million of dividends each year to its shareholders and where the resulting service is still likely to be poor. Renationalisation has been considered, and set aside on the grounds of cost. Minimalist options don't solve the economic and political problem. Reluctantly the Government is coming round to the idea of a non-profit making trust as the least bad way out.  The model is Glas Cymru, the not-for-profit company that bought Welsh Water. The Government would set up a similar company into which Railtrack shareholders would voluntarily transfer their ownership rights in exchange for cash. The new public interest company could issue bonds on its own account, receive government rail modernisation grants and embark on remodelled public-private partnerships; it would become the rail industry leader and custodian of improved services - but without being compromised by the need to serve the interests of private shareholders. The rail operating companies could be offered a stake but the majority of the equity would be held by the Government. The idea would be to reintegrate the system, offer leadership, an end to the culture of contractual confrontation, and lower financing costs.  The left-of-centre think-tank, the Institute of Public Policy Research, is pushing this argument - and the Government is at least listening. Four weeks ago I would have said the idea had little chance, but now I wonder. The status quo is insupportable, and the only way forward is some new form of public engagement - and this is the most robust and effective. 11 September was horrific, but this is the law of unintended consequences working more remarkably than any of us could have guessed.