It was the prime minister's third press conference in as many days. He was nearly 40 minutes late, possibly because he had just heard that some petrol companies had decided that yesterday was the perfect time to stick another 2p on a litre - timing which even Mr Peter "Dome" Mandelson, a man who appears to have all the public relations skills of Pot Noodle, would have eschewed. The prime minister arrived so quickly and silently in the State Dining Room that we hardly noticed he was there before he began to speak. He was in front of a portrait of George II, the last English king to lead his troops into battle, an example which Mr Blair appears not to have decided to follow this week.  But there is a link; King George was famously out of tune with the mood of the people. However, he had an excuse in that his first language was German. The prime minister himself speaks Blairish.  Actually, Blairish is not so much a language as a cast of mind. Blairish is inclusive. It seeks consensus. Nothing is asserted; instead the Blairish speaker precedes his wisdom with remarks such as "I think everyone will agree..." or, "you know, I hope people will reflect carefully on events..." Someone asked if he saw the apparent ending of the crisis as a defeat of the "forces of conservatism", which play the same role for the present government as the Daleks did in Dr Who.  But there was no gloating. "I don't think it's a question of defeating anyone," he said vaguely, in an emollient phrase lifted straight from the Blairish lexicon. His eyes constantly roamed round the room looking for agreement. Thatcherish was the language of confrontation, or as your Latin teacher might have put it, "question expecting the answer 'sod off'." A sentence in Blairish, in contrast, is supposed to invite a low mumble of agreement.  He did look very tired and under terrific strain, though people who had attended Wednesday's performance said he looked a lot better than yesterday. The temptation to shout "Yes! Result!" at the top of his voice must have been great, but he resisted it manfully. He refused to gloat. He realised that hauliers had faced a very difficult time with their increased costs (was there a hint here that his life would be a lot easier without having a cackling Silas Marner figure next door, grabbing every bawbee he can from the lorry drivers, farmers, manufacturers, widows and orphans of Britain?) but he was sure we'd agree that everyone always wanted to cut taxes and raise public spending at the same time.  He even refused to plead that he was protecting the environment, always a temptation for politicians. "In a rural area, the price of petrol is an issue, and it's no good us not saying that it isn't an issue." I was reminded of a man rediscovering the joys of not banging his head against a brick wall.  Then a French reporter asked: "You say that 'no government worthy of the name could give in to such a protest'. How is the French government supposed to take that?"  A look of mild panic crossed the prime minister's face, and for a fleeting second the eyes seemed to wander off in two different directions. The Blairish language simply can't cope with criticism; it doesn't have the vocabulary. "I am speaking only for us," he rambled, "some of the measures taken there have been rather different from the ones which have appeared in the newspapers there, I am not criticising the French government..."  Of course, of course. Then he was gone and we filed out as George II gazed majestically down on us. It was, by the way, the French against whom he led his lads into battle.