Jack Straw made a statement about the government's contingency plans if there's another fuel crisis. These appear to involve stockpiling massive quantities of blame, which will be driven out from secret depots in the dead of night, under police escort, and dumped on the Tories. And... that seems to be it. Mr Straw clearly has lots of clever ideas up his sleeve. He just didn't tell us what they were. He talked about his "preparations", "detailed plans" and even "upgraded arrangements". But he didn't describe any. Clearly, the measures are designed to win the only struggle that counts in new Labour - the battle for public opinion.  In this he was massively helped by the shadow home secretary, Ann Widdecombe. She didn't merely react to Mr Straw's statement - she exploded in a massive ball of flame, like a 5th of November bonfire set alight early by hooligans.  It was a frightening yet majestic sight. Labour MPs got as close as they dared, though beaten back by the popping, the hissing, the shards of burning timber, the sheer blistering heat.  Ms Widdecombe paid brief lip service to the need to keep the economy moving. However, her rage was not against the protesters but against the government. "The real reason for any impending fuel crisis is this arrogant and out of touch government's refusal to cut fuel tax!" she yelled at the top of her voice.  Airliners on the flight path to Heathrow were warned of possible damage to sensitive instruments.  "The government has caused this crisis by its refusal to listen to the hard-pressed people of Britain!" she crackled. We noticed that the top of her head had turned white once again, as if melted by the heat. Labour MPs, who adore a Widdecombe rant, chortled merrily. The Speaker intervened. "I cannot hear the honourable lady," he complained.  Couldn't hear her? Hours afterwards, I still couldn't make out low notes. Up in the gallery we considered a bulk order for RAF ear defenders.  Then, "can I urge the protesters not to resort to unlawful action?" she asked improbably, to mocking Labour jeers. Instead, she fumed, her voice rising once again to the level that causes bats to crash down chimneys, they should "use the ballot box to get rid of this lying, cheating, arrogant, stealth-taxing Labour government!"  In the Watford area, it was reported that a cow had given birth to a goat.  She then sank back on to the bench. Jack Straw, who is a master of the soft answer which only increases wrath, observed mildly that Winston Churchill once said, "if you've got a weak case, shout!" At this Ms Widdecombe managed to look furious and scornful at the same time.  Nothing, however, shuts her up. As Mr Straw set the Tories up by demanding that they denounce the tactics of the protesters, she sat still burning with anger and contempt. "Get on with it! Answer the question!" she yelled. As she continued I made a rough calculation that she had actually bellowed more from her seat than she had from the dispatch box.  "I do not wish to intrude into your private grief," said Mr Straw -"Intrude! Intrude!" cried Labour MPs - but, he went on obligingly, her conference speech had shown she was as out of touch with her party as she was with the public.  Just as a bonfire smokes and smoulders long after the flames die, the shadow home secretary went on radiating scorching heat through the chamber. Having managed to label the Tories as members of the Friends of Mayhem, Jack Straw looked extremely pleased with himself.