On my way to the Lords to attend the debate on their future, I stopped to pick up one of the guides printed for tourists from exotic lands - the latest being in Welsh. Apart from learning that the woolsack is y sach wlan , and that the LibDems are the democratiaid rhyddfrydol , I discovered that the lord chancellor, Derry Irvine, is known to his Welsh subjects as Arglwydd Ganghellor .  The Great Lord Gangler! What a title! I watched him with increased reverence, as he gangled around in his pocket, appeared to pull something out of his ear and put it in his mouth, then gangled inside his wig, rummaging round as if trying to find a small woodland creature that had got lost.  I was so wrapped up in this display that I failed to spot someone who had slipped unnoticed into the chamber, and was sitting behind him on the steps to the throne - not just on the steps, but bang in the middle in front of the throne, in such a position that if Her Majesty were in place, she would be able to kick him swiftly and painfully in the kidneys. Jeffrey Archer was back.  Only four months after what we assumed to be the terminal disgrace of his career, he was there, among his colleagues in what is nominally still our upper house, not just listening in a concerned, sage sort of way to the debate, but - given that he can no longer sit with the Tories, having been expelled from the party - in the most prominent position the whole chamber has to offer, short of perching on y sach wlan itself.  I have seen giraffes with less sheer neck than Archer. Short of his asking the Queen to pretend she would have dinner with him, I cannot imagine a greater display of nerve.  Unless, perhaps, it was Lady Jay's speech on the reform of the house itself. They were discussing the royal commission report. The government wants an appointed house, but with a few - a very few - elected members.  Now we know the real reason, which is that if you start letting the electorate decide who represents them you get all kinds of non-New Labour riffraff: look at the vote for London mayor. But nobody can say this in public.  Instead Lady Jay announced gravely: "Any proposal totally to elect the second chamber, under the mistaken view that it would increase the democratic base of parliament, would in fact undermine democracy."  This was breathtaking enough. But, perhaps fearing a barrage of rotten fruit and eggs from the benches opposite, she felt she had to explain things more fully. If the house were elected, she said, "perhaps on a different franchise, the clear voice of the people would be obscured, and perhaps paradoxically, democratic responsibility weakened".  I sat slack-jawed through this rococo example of sophistry without sophistication. Lord Strathclyde, the Tory leader, confined himself to saying that he wanted more voting. "We do not think there is anything to fear in an election." What a wonderful turn-up: a hereditary Tory peer telling a Labour government that they should trust the people more. I truly never thought I would live to see it.  As soon as Lord Strathclyde finished, peers - including "Lord" Archer - disappeared, which was a shame since they missed a good speech by the democratiaid rhyddfrydol leader Bill Rogers. He said he had been promised that, if his party co-operated with the government, they would get more peers.  Lady Jay, clearly baffled by this revelation and perhaps out of the government loop, demanded to know who had told him. Lord Rogers said that, to spare her blushes, he would not say.  Beside her, staring into space, a look of truculent innocence on his face, Lord Irvine sat, happily gangling away to himself.