Tony Blair gave an important talk to the newspaper conference yesterday. Not for the first time, I was struck by the way a Blair speech is closer to a musical composition than to mere rhetoric. Like a piece of music, its aim isn't to inform but to create good feelings.  It's no more about facts and policies than the Pastoral Symphony is an examination of the common agricultural policy.  And like a piece of music, it has a definite structure, based on internal rhythm and repetition. A theme is announced and then echoed. Fresh themes are introduced and melded in with the earlier ones. The repetition brings a satisfying familiarity, so that by the end the listener's brain vibrates with the interwoven passages.  Nobody ever finished listening to a Blair speech and said, "well, I learned something there". Instead they praise the bravura performance and enjoy the afterglow created by the mood.  He began: "My argument today is this." That was the equivalent of the conductor tapping his baton.  Next he announced: "Britain is stronger together, than separated apart." (How you might be separated together he didn't explain, but that's not the point.)  "True Britishness lies in our values, not unchanging institutions," he continued. This was Beethoven's technique: state the main themes crisply and boldly at the start and then refer back to them at different tempos and in different settings. So "Britain" or "British" in the second sentence appeared a further 47 times in the speech, a rate of nearly five times a minute.  "Values", usually integrated into a longer phrase, such as "a clear sense of shared values", or "our core values as a country," appeared 17 times. And variations on "change" (sometimes in the invariably pejorative "unchanging") cropped up 16 times.  In his third sentence he introduced another powerful theme: "the constitutional changes we have made ... are the means of strengthening Britain for today's world."  "Strong" and "strengthening" appeared 17 times, often associated with "standing up", in the sense of resisting the enemies of change.  The fourth paragraph bound this theme to the earlier ones: "Standing up for our country means standing up for what we believe in. It means standing up for our values, and having the strength ... to stand up for the core British values."  As the themes circled round and disappeared up their own treble clefs, the orchestra was in full flight. The violins were soaring, the harps created a loud glissando, and the brass was about to crash in.  "To fail to modernise would be to fail Britain. But we must modernise according to our core values ..." (The various forms of "modernise" appeared 11 times, and were coupled with the nine mentions of "reform".)  After just two minutes, all the main motifs had appeared.  Three minutes later we heard of a "Britain that is stronger, fairer, modernised ... modernisation based on values."  Then, "standing up for Britain means fighting for British values" (the kettledrums were pounding now).  So we seemed to be moving towards a crescendo. But this is not the composer's style.  Instead we were reaching a diminuendo, a soft, gentle coda in which the main themes were gathered together in verbless sentences, creating mood music which sent the audience into a pleasing, soporific reverie. "An economy gaining in strength. Pride from a modern constitution that strengthens the nation.  "We are rediscovering our strength and values. We are uniting those values ... to make Britain stronger..."  And so the listeners left, no wiser but much happier, the music echoing round and round in their heads.