Summer in the Commons, and agriculture questions provide a riot of colour. Sitting on benches as green as rolling hills, Shona McIsaac and Joan Ruddock are both wearing yellow jackets, the colour of genetically modified oilseed rape. Joyce Quin, a junior minister, is in dark green, like a field of early barley, and Ruth Kelly sports a suit the colour of bluebells in a sunlit copse. Only Anne McIntosh, Tory MP for the Vale of York, trim and elegant in her brown jacket, reminds us of the sombre hues of winter. But Ms McIntosh has no need for artificial cheer. She leads a life crammed with exciting incident, all of which she faxes to our Guardian office here at Westminster.  "MP queries council bid for new tennis centre," we learn. "MP says, let's talk more pork!" and "Just the ticket! MP debates bus services in Vale of York."  One recent arrival records: "MP puts Vale of York on the map", which is kind of her, though not strictly necessary. It's a vale, near York.  Other Tories attacked the agriculture minister, Nick Brown, who they detest because he seems so nerdy. On pigmeat prices, Edward Leigh said that the French would never put up with the situation. "We want a minister who is less nice, and acts more like a Frenchman!"  (He didn't say which Frenchman, but Marcel Marceau would be my choice. His speeches were so short.)  "Bonjour, Madam Speaker," said Mr Brown, to howls of laughter. This is an example of parliamentary humour, being completely unamusing out of context, but at the time, frightfully dreary.  Mr Brown had a reply, one of those superb pieces of jargon which modern farming tends to throw up. "Supply exceeds demand," he said, then added: "the classic pig cycle has plummeted." It sounded like the storyboard from a Warner Bros cartoon.  On we ploughed. Mr Doug Naysmith wanted to know when the full passports for pets scheme would be "rolled out". You'll know when you start to see people holding up their dobermans in the photo booths, trying to get their eyes level with the flash.  John Bercow, the doberman of the Tory benches, essayed a sneer at Peter Mandelson, not something I would ever do. Will any ministers be taking advantage of the scheme, he asked. "Will the Northern Ireland secretary's dog Bobby be an early beneficiary?"  There were many implications in this question, including the suggestion that the law might have been changed for one minister, and the faintly camp whiff which clings to single men who love their little dogs. But Mr Bercow was shot down, port engine ablaze, by Ms Quin. "You seem to have forgotten that Northern Ireland is part of the United Kingdom."  It would be an exaggeration to say that Mr Bercow looked embarrassed. He wouldn't look embarrassed if he arrived in the chamber with his hair replaced by oilseed rape. But he did look rather silly.  The jargon continued. Mr James Paice, a Tory spokesman, demanded the government "amalgamate set-aside in terms of headlands, so farmers can be persuaded to convert headlands to go to conservation set-aside," a remark which appeared to make perfect sense to everyone except me.  Only Derek Wyatt could grow lyrical about this subject. "Lapwings, skylarks, bunting and curlew numbers are growing. How can we cope if nature prefers set-aside?"  My eyes strayed to Ms Judy Mallaber, MP for Amber Valley. Her hair, a mass of red curls, made her look like a majestic copper beech. We should have set-aside in the Commons, so that birds can make their homes in those glorious tresses.