Who do we think we are? And what kind of a people are the 21st-century British? These are almost impossibly large questions. Yet the hostile tone surrounding two of the hottest political stories of the day makes it important to try to give some kind of an answer.  Are we now, as the response to the so-called election "dirty tricks" stories suggests, so offended by so much of our political life that many of us seem ready to wash our hands not just of the campaign but even of the electoral process itself?  Alternatively, are we a nation whose fears about immigration, asylum and crime are now so strong that the parties are compelled to bid and outbid one another in an effort to keep pace with our anger?  The evidence suggests we are a bit of both. More than ever before, Britons dismiss their politicians and their political campaigners with disdain. In surveys we relegate them to among the most despised in the land. Only a quarter of us trust MPs and ministers to tell the truth, on a par with estate agents. Tony Blair we treat with open contempt, but Michael Howard's ratings are even worse. Alastair Campbell's return to work for Labour has triggered something close to hysteria about the presumed reversal in standards of political life.  The British public seems to derive comfort from this unflattering relationship. Our default position is to see ours as a society in which the politicians are always the source of the problem and the public their innocent victims. Admittedly this can have its positive side. Scepticism about government's ability to solve problems is not only healthy but often well-based too.  But it leads us simultaneously into some dangerous collective vanities. Without much evidence, we like to think of ourselves as essentially model citizens anxious to engage in civic debate and activity but constantly frustrated from doing so by politicians who are not worthy of us. As a result we dignify non-participation in elections as proof of the failings of politicians rather than of any failings of our own. It is, to put it mildly, an idealised self-image.  How much of one it is is highlighted by the current anxiety over immigration and asylum. Individually, we may like to regard ourselves as able to rise above the crowd, able to distinguish between migration and asylum, willing to make the cultural adjustments and modernisations that go with life in multiracial societies, untouched by the anxious fretting about the changing nature of Britishness.  Yet the statistical evidence alone should destroy any such complacency. Most people in this country are very worried about these changes. They feel threatened by them. Three-quarters of us believe that immigrant numbers should be reduced and believe that the government is not tough enough on asylum seekers. Seventy per cent think immigration is not necessary. Nearly half of us say that we may change our votes over the issue - and that means may vote for parties promising tougher measures.  Moreover these views, which were already widespread, are increasing not declining. Familiarity has not eased such fears - as at one point it seemed might occur - but has aggravated them. As a survey in the most recent British social attitudes survey, published in December 2004, points out, these trends are particularly notable because, in most other respects, public opinion has tended to shift in a more liberal direction over the past 20 years.  Nor, the BSA researchers point out, is this shift confined to what in other circumstances one might describe as anti-immigration's core vote - the white, working-class readers of tabloid newspapers and those with lower levels of educational qualification. Previously pro-immigration groups such as graduates, Labour supporters and those with a high level of interest in policy and politics have been part of the change, too. Perhaps it has even affected Guardian readers. The researchers say it seems as though there has been "a culture shift throughout society".  The BSA team cannot come up with any single overarching reason for this change. Stronger national pride may have something to do with it. But we are not becoming more conservative, and we do not think we are becoming more prejudiced (though we think that others may be). Economic factors seem relatively unimportant too, they reckon, since these shifts have taken place in times of material plenty. The main reason seems also to be the most obvious one: immigration has increased faster than those living here (which includes many immigrants) think acceptable. In the case of asylum, this perception is compounded by a belief that many asylum seekers are also jumping the queue unfairly.  Though they do not say it outright, the BSA team seem certain that the explanation for these changes has also got something to do with the role of the media. The hardening of views against immigration certainly coincides with an increase in media coverage, which in turn has encouraged an increase in government pronouncements on the subject. Since most of these pronouncements are negative in tone and content - Charles Clarke's yesterday is an example - and are in turn reported in even more pronounced negative terms in many media, it is not surprising that attitudes have shifted. The public, the politicians and the press all affect one another. In this case, it takes three to tango.  In his 1845 novel Sybil, Benjamin Disraeli wrote about the two nations, the rich and the poor, "between whom there is no intercourse and no sympathy; who are as ignorant of each others' habits, thoughts and feelings, as if they were dwellers in different zones or inhabitants of different planets".  That was written about a Britain where the rich had all the power and the poor had none. One of the many things that has changed since then is that the politicians whom Disraeli satirised now have to win the votes of all the people. Disraeli wrote at the dawn of the industrial age. Yet now, at the end of that age, it sometimes seems as if there is still a divide between two mutually uncomprehending nations, distant but direct descendants of those about which Disraeli wrote, and that in some respects the divide is as deep and unbridged as ever.  Politicians have to be alive to the concerns of the voters. These concerns are not always comfortable and the politicians cannot always satisfy them. But they cannot opt out of the conversation. Nor should the rest of us. We should give our politicians more of a break.  Blair, Clarke and their colleagues are making a much better job of bridging the divides than they are given credit for. They are trying to adjust to a period of rapid and massive global change that is every bit as tumultuous as that of the 1840s. They are doing so with varying degrees of honesty and competence, now as always. But they are confronting a real world, not an imaginary one. And though the politicians dare not say it, for fear of being ridiculed, the truth is that most of us have never had it so good. 