As the applause for Gordon Brown's barnstorming speech surged round the Brighton conference centre, up on the platform Tony Blair gave his chancellor a very public and very hefty clap on the back. If you believed everything you read, Blair should have had a dagger in his hand. Neither for the first time nor the last, the reality was less dramatic and more complex.  By any careful and objective standards, the speech that Brown gave yesterday ought to be classified as a New Labour speech delivered by a New Labour politician. Brown uses that label often and willingly. Most of his advisers are comfortable with it. And, more importantly, the language and content of the speech were New Labour too.  Take the speech's most reiterated phrase about the need for a "new progressive consensus". Nothing Old Labour about that. Progressive is one of the quintessential New Labour words; a word that, if one was trying to sow discord, one would even describe as Mandelsonian. And what about that passage in which Brown talked about not resting until the public services are "reformed and renewed"? Or the sentence in which he said there can be "no security without change"? Or the contemptuous dismissal of the very idea of rail renationalisation?  The Blair-Brown relationship being what it is, there is a ready market for the view that in some sections of his speech the chancellor carefully signalled a different - and generally more statist, pro-union, anti-market and even Old Labour - agenda from the prime minister's. As he approached his peroration, Brown conjured up a Britain defined by free state-provided health and education and by a public service ethic, contrasting its values with "those of contracts, markets and exchange".  Those words drew spontaneous applause from parts of the hall. But Brown has become a past master at allowing people to project on to him views that he does not hold. Brown's public-service vision exists alongside his commitment to the British economic model of "competition, liberalisation and reform" of which he also spoke yesterday, and which he regularly contrasts with Europe's welfare-heavy lack of economic dynamism. His advocacy of public-private partnerships has also been a leitmotif of his Treasury years.  That is not to say Brown's was the kind of speech that Blair would have written for him. There is no chance of that. The basic reason for this, as usual, is that Brown aimed his speech at a party audience. That's too often his default setting - and the reason why the Liberal Democrats and the Tories would relish their prospects under a Brown premiership. A Blair speech, like the one the prime minister will deliver today, is different. It has the whole nation as its audience.  This distinction goes to the heart of why Labour is still better off with Blair and Brown working in tandem rather than against one another. Brown may touch the Labour party's soul, but he is perceived by the voters as someone well to the left of the majority. Blair may perpetually leave Labour audiences wondering whether he is really one of them, but even today, as a YouGov survey in yesterday's Daily Telegraph showed, Blair remains the undisputed king of the centre ground - without which Labour loses elections.  Brighton has fizzed with speculation about whether, when and how the prime minister may fall and the chancellor succeed him. It was hard to listen to the warmth of the applause that welcomed Brown to the rostrum yesterday and not construe it partly as a yearning for new leadership - or at least for a simpler political life.  Brown is a protean public figure, a formidable chancellor and a man who knows exactly how to make a speech that will rekindle the party's fervour. But this strength is also a kind of limitation. Brown is nothing if not a party man. He did not get where he is today by letting his discipline slip. Which is why, in the end, Brown delivered a party loyalist speech not a leadership bid.  This is not exactly how Brown's speech had been trailed. The chancellor's outriders spent Sunday whispering into favoured ears that Brown's speech would be a coded attack on Blair, as revenge for Brown's disputed removal from the centre of the Labour re-election campaign. It is true that the speech can be deconstructed to expose discordant signals, and it is beyond dispute that Brown was hurt by this month's reshuffle. But it is just as true that the speech sent out harmonious signals as well. Brown speeches frequently touch all the bases in this way. By comparison with last year's undisguised aggression towards Blair, however, it was muted - and this is perhaps the key point.  Yesterday Brown again proved why he is the natural successor to Blair. But this is not a new revelation. Everyone knows, and most Labour people still accept, that Brown is the leader in waiting. However, everyone also knows that Brown is extremely cautious - with the striking exception of last year's taunting speech - about forcing the issue.  Ironically, that dilemma may be taken out of Brown's hands on Thursday. For both Blair and Brown the most important scheduled event of the week takes place on the North Sea coast rather than the south coast. Thursday's Hartlepool byelection is the kind of contest that used to galvanise the whole of party politics and political journalism. Today, with byelections more ruthlessly controlled from the centre and hence less characterful, such contests are less high profile. But they still matter just as much as they used to.  It has been a long time since a party leader's future hung on the future of a byelection. But it is true of Blair and Hartlepool on Thursday. If the Liberal Democrat Jody Dunn manages to suck up the anti-Labour vote to defeat Labour's Iain Wright, then Blair's grip on power would be rocked. Blair has sometimes said that he would not hang around if he thought he was a liability to his party's electoral chances. Defeat for Labour on Thursday would leave him staring that conclusion in the face.  The more intriguing scenario, though, concerns the aftermath of a Labour victory. If Wright is elected to replace Peter Mandelson, then Labour will judge that the electoral sea-wall has held against the high tide of disaffection with the Blair government. A Wright victory will lead Labour to conclude that Blair is safe to lead the party into the general election.  It all depends on the scale of the Labour victory. Mandelson had a 38-point lead when he retained the seat in 2001. If Wright sees off the challengers with a win of that kind, then Blair is entitled to conclude that the worst is over. But if the lead is down to single figures, Labour MPs all around the country will be looking down the barrel of a gun. And that could start a process that even Gordon Brown's hard-wired caution may be unable to resist.  