Lord Gould - as we must learn to refer to the Labour party's top pollster since his elevation last week - claims that a general election always resolves itself into a single proposition. In 1997, the proposition was that Labour, although not entirely trustworthy, deserved its chance. Four years later, it was that Labour deserved another go, even if it had not yet done very much.  It is not yet clear what the equivalent proposition in 2005 is going to be. But it seems plausible to speculate that the eventual outcome might rest between two possibilities. On the one hand: Labour has messed up but the Tories are unlikely to be worse, so give them a chance. On the other: Labour hasn't been great but nobody else is likely to be any better, so stick with them.  If you prefer your politics to embody a clear-cut antagonism like the Trojan war, then this is a miserable choice. But while there is certainly something depressingly similar about the two propositions, it is also true that they point in different directions. That is why, from the government's point of view, the two questions facing politics today are, first, what must happen over the next 12 months to ensure that politics resolves itself in favour of the Labour rather than the Tory option and, second, what can be done to make the Labour option a more positive choice than it has at present become?  To answer that question it is important to start from where things are. In at least one respect, Labour's position is significantly stronger than some of the rather apocalyptic talk that you hear at the moment would suggest.  Even now, for instance, and in spite of Iraq, Hutton, immigration, Europe and all the rest of it, Labour is actually ahead in the big quantitative polls. The Guardian-ICM, for example, shows Labour on a slight upward - not downward - trend in the last three months. And on a uniform swing, Labour's latest ICM lead of five points would produce a notional Labour majority of around 136 in a general election. No, I don't believe it either, but the projection cannot simply be disregarded because it doesn't square with one's prejudices.  It is when you look at the qualitative polling - the focus groups - that the picture darkens and the alarm bells start to ring. Pollsters working with switchers - the people who voted Tory until 1997, then Labour in 97 and 01, but who are now thinking of voting Tory again - report a national mood wholly at odds with any quantitative poll-induced complacency. These are the people whose votes decide elections and experienced focus group pollsters say their mood is more negative than at any time since the 1980s.  In switcher Britain, things are going very badly. Switchers believe the country is under siege from foreign threats. There is something close to hysteria among them about asylum seekers. There is fear of unchecked migration as a result of European enlargement. There is unease about personal safety from the terrorist threat, especially in London.  But it isn't just the enemy without that worries the switchers. They think nothing in Britain works either. They are worried about levels of debt. They fret about their children's problems of getting into the housing market - again, particularly in London. They think their pensions have evaporated. And they think things are getting worse in the public services.  Actually, much of the evidence there contradicts them. But perception is its own reality, and the perception in switcher Britain is that the improvements in hospitals, schools and houses are being gobbled up by foreigners. In switcher Britain, Blair puts foreigners first, spending too much time on foreign affairs and letting too many foreigners into Britain where they jump the queue for public services and goods.  It's not that switchers have necessarily been victims of such unfairness themselves. They mostly haven't. Nor even that they know anyone else who has been. That's not true either. Their own experience of getting to see a GP or a hospital appointment, or of improvements at their kids' schools may in fact be quite positive. Their view is that things may be OK for them - but the country is in a mess. The pollsters call it the "I've been lucky" syndrome.  They're angry out there in switcher land. They feel stressed and overworked, suspicious and cynical. Above all, perhaps, they feel let down, and let down by the government in particular. Their sense of being let down is intimately linked to their sense of Blair. They thought he was different. They bought into the idea that he offered not just a different kind of politics but a different way of doing politics. They still talk about their high hopes of 1997.  Now, though, they think he's just the same as the others. They think he's out of touch and they think he doesn't tell the truth. That's where Iraq comes in. The switchers weren't necessarily against the war. But they think Blair duped them - and perhaps duped himself. They think he was following his own agenda rather than theirs. And because they were once so beguiled by him, so today they are the more disillusioned with him.  Election campaigns are conducted largely to win the switchers' support. It is not hard to feel outraged by this. Why should the whole future of our country - and, more grandly, of civil society - be in the hands of such selfish, inconsistent, prejudiced, ignorant and pampered people? It's a fair complaint, even though they would still hold the key to an election held under a fairer system.  What follows for Labour from all this? The overarching answer, pretty obviously, is that Labour needs to renew its relationship with the electorate. This is by no means impossible, given that the feeling of letdown coexists with a fairly resilient Labour lead over the Tories. Voters like Labour's priorities, they prefer Labour's positions on the main issues, and they think Labour has done well, notably on the economy. Moreover, they don't particularly want to vote Tory, and they haven't bought into Michael Howard.  The great lesson from the switchers, therefore, is not primarily ideological. It is to be much more serious about doing politics better. The mood invites far greater emotional intelligence from politicians in discussing hard issues, a greater willingness to admit mistakes, and a readiness to show one is listening. This does not point to an "old" or "traditional" Labour approach, as much as to a more honest Labour one. What this government needs more than anything else is a dignity it currently lacks.  It is not so much a question of who leads the government as of how it is led. A lot of this is about plugging away at big tasks. Ironically, Blair may offer Labour its best chance of renewal. That's how the public still sees it. But he will need to rethink style and stance - not least on Iraq - to survive to win the argument in 2005. And that calls for a transformation that he may be neither willing nor capable of making at this stage of his career.  