This has clearly not been the reshuffle that Tony Blair had in his mind at the start of the week. If Blair had had his way, Alan Milburn would still have been sitting round the cabinet table today, perhaps even in his old job; Peter Hain would have been there with a cross-departmental brief as minister for Europe; Geoff Hoon would have been nursing the newborn ministry of justice into its first days of life; and John Reid would have been back in the Ministry of Defence, this time in the top job.  But Milburn's decision to spend more time with his family threw a very large spanner in all these works. The former health secretary is a huge loss to Blair as a political ally, but the more immediate impact of his resignation was that it meant the reshuffle had to be reconceived from scratch. Milburn's departure was then compounded by Blair's failure to overcome Jack Straw's objections to the Europe minister plan, and by David Blunkett's equally obdurate defence of his Home Office responsibilities, a resistance which resulted in the hurried birth of the new ministry for constitutional affairs, to be headed by Lord Falconer.  Add all that together and it is not entirely surprising that some of the instant commentary on the reshuffle has cast Blair as a weakened, increasingly isolated figure at the head of his own government, gazing out across the apparent ruin of the New Labour modernising project and waiting for the knock on the door from an increasingly irresistible Gordon Brown.  This is, though, a severe misreading of the manifestly less-than-perfect changes announced by Downing Street on Thursday. As he looks around the cabinet table when the new team meets for the first time next week, Blair will see plenty of supporters on all sides.Yesterday he buttressed them with a stratum of men and women in the junior ministerial ranks who can mostly be classed as strong supporters. None of this is to minimise the loss of Milburn. Nor is it to deny that Blair has an increasingly serious political problem. He does. But the problem is not in his government, but elsewhere.  Blair's problem is that not enough people respect or trust him, or even think he is doing a good job, as they once did. Admittedly, trust and respect are words with many-sided meanings, and we live in an age where both qualities are much harder to win than they were in the more deferential past. Nevertheless, the scale of the problem comes through very forcefully in some recent polling numbers. At the time of the 2001 election, two out of three voters thought that the government was honest and trustworthy, compared with one out of three who thought it was neither. Today those figures have been reversed.  That is why the big issue in British politics today is not Blair v Brown, nor even when and if the Conservative party can re-establish itself as a plausible alternative government - important and real though these questions both are. The big questions today are whether and how Labour can rebuild the levels of trust and respect that it enjoyed as recently as two years ago.  It is a truism that it is far easier to build something up than it is to knock something down. People understand that from their own experience. But having squandered so much support among Labour voters over Iraq - and having caused so much pain to large sections of the party thereby - Blair has no more pressing and challenging priority than to win back the confidence and affection of his core supporters. Everything in British politics turns on whether he is prepared to make that effort, and on how he proposes to go about it.  In that context, the only important things in the reshuffle are the return of Estelle Morris, because it makes the Labour party feel good, and the creation of the constitutional affairs department, which makes the party feel radical again. The latter may have been cobbled together on the hoof, have been badly launched and some aspects of the initial plans will clearly need to be rethought - but it is without question a real change. It is not just a statement of radical intent but a real, live piece of radical action.  Even so, it is not enough to fill the trust gap on its own, except perhaps among the regrettably small numbers of people who still see the necessity of maintaining the pressure on the constitutional reform agenda. At heart, though, the abolition of the lord chancellor's powers is still what the Americans would call a Beltway issue - a subject of great interest to the political class - but not to normal people. And the same, in most respects, can be said of the reshuffle. It simply doesn't play in Pontefract.  But the example is important. It creates confidence among the core support that the government still has urges with which they can identify. These core supporters have been badly hurt, not just over Iraq. No single event in recent weeks better showed the price that the government has paid for that than the failure of Jack Dromey to win the election to succeed Sir Bill Morris as head of the Transport and General Workers' Union.  Ordinarily a candidate with Dromey's record and talent should have been an easy winner. But he was incapacitated by being thought of as a Blairite. It should have been a wake-up call. The worry is that Blair may just have shrugged his shoulders when he heard.  What could turn this state of affairs around in a lasting way? The first and most self-evident answer is clearly delivery in the major public services. That is why Reid's appointment is so important. He has to find a way of "driving" health service reform at the same time as preventing the NHS from becoming a political battleground.  The second answer is much more directly within the government's own control. It needs to listen to, and engage with, its unhappy well-wishers. Blair needs to pay his MPs and the unions more respectful attention than he has tended to do in the past, or at least to employ a few more people around him in Downing Street to do that necessary task for him. There are not enough people in the immediate circle who can do this at present. There is a need for a reshuffle there too.  A third part of the answer lies in ministers' own hands too. As well as listening to criticism, they have got to find a way of addressing the public more credibly. They have to find a way of being more grown-up in public. This means seriously dismantling parts of the centralised on-message culture to allow politicians to admit to uncertainty, error and ambivalence. The trust issue will never recover without such a loosening up.  But the need to engage has to go much wider. Last week, the Hansard Society published a pamphlet, A Tale of Two Houses, which suggests ways in which the political class as a whole can open its mind and its eyes to the Big Brother generation. Politicians, suggests the author, should do far more to show that they live in the same world as the millions who live in this instantly connected world. Not necessarily to be like them, but certainly to know what it is like to be them. These ideas apply to politicians of all stripes, and they apply with at least as much force to Brown as they do to Blair.  But the rest of us need to be a bit grown-up too. There is no immediate prospect of any other government in this country than the one we have. A Brown premiership is years away, never mind a Duncan Smith premiership. The best we can hope for is for a better Blair. The big question, therefore, is how we can get one.  