We had a traditional Christmas. The pilot light went out in the boiler. My mother was bad-tempered. The giblets made the dog sick. Sheffield Wednesday lost. But one unexpected incident shone more brightly than the star in the east. Princess Anne's behaviour immediately after she had celebrated the birth of the Prince of Peace made it the most memorable season of goodwill for years. I offer her royal highness my humble congratulations and hope it is not lese-majeste on my part to add: "Keep it up, Ma'am. Keep it up." Endpiece readers may not be familiar with what happened outside Sandringham Church - and may find the details of the story difficult to believe even when they hear them. But they were reported in the tabloid newspapers and are therefore beyond dispute. A 75-year-old lady called Mrs Halfpenny made a basket - plaiting the wicker with her own hands - and filled it with flowers. 
She then travelled half the length of the country in the hope of presenting it to the Queen Mother as the royal family left the Christmas Day morning service. As the object of her affection was absent she handed her gift to one of the royal princelings in the hope that it would be passed on. On hearing these details, Princess Anne observed: "What a ridiculous thing to do."  The only serious complaint that can be made about the Princess Royal's behaviour is that her understatement did less than full justice to the absurdity of Mrs Halfpenny's conduct. I suspect that somewhere in Windsor castle there is a room full of home-made wicker baskets which an under-footman will be commanded to destroy on an appropriately discreet occasion. Perhaps that is how the fire started seven years ago.   However, we can be pretty sure that at least Mrs Halfpenny has learned the idiocy of her ways. She confessed that she was so anguished by Princess Anne's reproof that she had totally "lost faith in people". Her hopes for mankind were completely extinguished by the royal suggestion that her basketwork and flower arrangements were a waste of time.  I am anxious not to add to Mrs Halfpenny's trauma, but the only plausible excuse for her conduct is the undoubted fact that proximity to a member of the royal family makes normally sensible people do and say silly things. And - since she clearly believes that the Queen Mother is sanctified - that explanation may only increase her   distress. So I simply say in mitigation of her madness that her sort of lunacy is encouraged by newspapers which write about the Windsors with what can only be described as intrusive reverence. The Halfpenny incident provided a perfect example.  Editors who thought it necessary to defend Princess Anne against the allegation that she had spoken the truth, offered the excuse that her normally equitable temper had been disturbed by concern about her daughter's health. Apparently Zara Phillips sustained superficial cuts and bruises in a motor accident which occurred about a week before Basketgate. The notion that prolonged maternal anxiety induced Princess Anne's impatience with an elderly sycophant is difficult to sustain. However, a couple of weeks ago we were subject to an even better example of the absurd way in which newspapers treat the royal family.  The same Zara Phillips had another accident. She fell down while playing hockey. Little as I know about the game, I suspect   that falling down is quite a common occurrence. But Ms Phillips's tumble became national news. And the trip or stumble was not the most sensational part of the story. What amazed the royal correspondents was the way in which the Queen's athletic granddaughter got to her feet and resumed the game as if she was a hockey-playing commoner. The sensational news that Ms Phillips sometimes behaves normally was no more than the approach march to the main assault on our intelligence. The blitzkrieg of banality was the carefully managed photo opportunity of Prince William behaving naturally in Patagonia.  No doubt Mrs Halfpenny thrilled to the spirit of the heir to the throne (once removed) cleaning out lavatories. I just regret that a country which pretends to be grown-up salivates over such trivia. One of the most cogent arguments for a republic is that the existence of a monarchy encourages us to do and say silly things. Happy new year, Princess Anne.  <A