Jonathan Franzen is what you might call a tricky bugger. He is very hard to read. He can be puckish, but you can't rely on the mischief. He looks a bit like Monty out of Withnail and I must have, before fat got him. Now 47, he dresses like a trendy don. Loud noises pain him absurdly. He is all rufty-tufty in conversation but socially incredibly thoughtful and worried about causing offence. When he refuses a coffee from a waitress, he follows up frantically with about 17 different reasons: I've already had one. Your coffee's delicious! I'm allergic to coffee. I am already taking coffee intravenously, under the table I have a coffee drip ... The Corrections, the book that won Franzen America's National Book Award in 2001, put him immediately on to the global authorial A-list. A couple of notable things surround it, besides the great worth of the book itself, which has already been remarked upon by everyone - certainly that I have ever heard - who has read it. He refused to endorse his book's appearance on Oprah Winfrey's book club, a very public spat at the time, which gave him a reputation for wanting to be highbrow, possibly for wanting to be more highbrow than he was. It was a notion compounded by the fact that The Corrections was his third novel, his first success after two works - Twenty-Seventh City and Strong Motion - whose reach perhaps exceeds their grasp. And now he has written a memoir, The Discomfort Zone: A Personal History, an extract of which appears in Review tomorrow. I suppose the danger is that it might be taken as an appendix to The Corrections, broadly, as a portrait of family dynamics, and more intricately about a father's Parkinson's disease and old age, and duty and recklessness, and was taken to be, if not autobiographical, nevertheless pretty close to home. The Discomfort Zone does nothing so obvious as sift out the fact from the artistic licence. He picks up episodes of his 1960s childhood - the time he spent loving Snoopy; the spelling bee he almost won but in the end drew, the semi-but-not-exactly Christian youth group that shaped his social persona - and buffs them to a high shine, refracts the rest of his life through them, realises their importance but also presents them as curiosities and doesn't make a great self-aggrandising deal out of them. I say I think memoir was an interesting genre to choose when he was at the crest of a fiction wave. "But that's why I chose it," he says, laconically. "I was on the crest of the fiction wave." But he also says: "I think one reason this book felt alive in the last few years is that I was extremely disoriented by my change in fortune, and it is a book about a feeling that I've lost the values of my youth. What I discovered in the process of writing it is that those values are not as clear-cut as I initially supposed. But still, it was elegiac in conception if not in final form." Generally speaking, its reception has been warm, though, of course, those aren't the reviews that have stuck with him. Michiko Kakutani, the New York Times's chief reviewer, absolutely hated it. "In the US," says Franzen, neutrally, "I seem to have tapped into a certain amount of hostility to me personally, so in hindsight it seems riskier than it actually felt when I was writing. In the hands of a particularly tone deaf and humourless reviewer [he is talking about Kakutani], my humble or self-satirising admissions come across as the declarations of a depraved person. I believe I was called a jackass. And the word self-absorbed was used as a pejorative. Unlike all those other, unself-absorbed writers." He is smiling his way through this, but it has definitely pissed him off. "I didn't see any of that coming, and it seemed to me that if you good-humouredly relate the story of your various failures, who could be mean about that? I've already been mean about myself." "It's a strategy," I say. "Yes." There is a long pause. I believe what he is about to extract is bathos. "But it turned out not to be very successful." I am amazed that he should be piqued by the review, even though I know nobody is immune to criticism - in his writing, he is prepared to leave himself totally vulnerable, in a way that you could only do if you were really self-aware. I still think he is self-aware, but I was wrong to think that makes him bulletproof. That morning, before I met him, Franzen was on Radio 4's Start the Week (with Craig Brown - there was a funny mix) and he said he had a love-hate relationship with America. I ask him to expand on that a little. "Expand how?" he says. Well, what does he love about it? "Why are you interested in knowing that?" Christ, I don't know . . . in the long run, I want to know where he stands politically. There is a section in The Discomfort Zone about Hurricane Katrina in which he allies himself unambiguously with the US left-wing and yet I don't think that allegiance could be taken as a given from the rest of the book, particularly his heartfelt and voluble affection for Webster Groves, the suburb of St Louis, Missouri, in which he grew up, the third son of a railroad manager and a homemaker. America seems very polarised, politically, and it would be interesting to hear whether that is true, or just seems like it from the outside, and if it is true, how he has managed to avoid it. All that doesn't come out in a neat nugget, though, not from me, anyway. Conversely, ideas issue from him in a complete and stylish state. He has a disconcerting habit of thinking before he speaks, and I suppose that is what comes of it. We get to politics eventually, when I posit that he is insufficiently liberal for the liberals and insufficiently reactionary for the conservatives. "That's the story of my life. I'm insufficiently elitist for the self-important, and I'm insufficiently populist for the Oprah-philes. I'm not bad enough to be bad and I'm not good enough to be good. I wasn't east enough to be east, I wasn't west enough to be west. That really is the story of my life. And when I was young, it all made sense because the middle seemed like a good place to be. That's the point of the book. The happy time when I didn't have to choose sides. Politically in particular, but culturally as well, you have to choose sides in the United States. It's a rabidly divided country, and it makes me miserable because both sides are wrong. Don't they know it? You don't make many friends that way, though. What you end up with for friends are the people who enjoy reading books. Which is fine - that's what I want. But it's not a very large group." I don't know about east and west, but I have always thought that Franzen fell between two stools in terms of the American literary scene, which consists on one side of very traditional storytellers, with a possibly highly complicated but nevertheless old-fashioned sense of narrative (John Irving, Anne Tyler, Garrison Keillor); and on the other side, the experimental writers (David Means, David Foster Wallace, George Saunders, Chris Bachelder), who are avant-garde, not as a pose, but because the innovation is the engine of the whole train. Franzen simply doesn't fit into either group - he is not defined by being experimental, I doubt you would even describe him as such at all. But nor is he a John Irving for our times. "I'm very flattered. Can you enrich the compliment by unpacking it a little?" (He does this a few times, assumes a compliment where there wasn't necessarily one. Distracted by something earlier, he returns to the conversation with "Sorry, you were just about to say something nice about me . . ." when I really wasn't. I still don't know if this is a mind game, or whether he just has rose-tinted hearing.) Let's clear this up, he says, George Saunders is not heavy-handed, he would be so amused to think that was how he was described. Oh, Philip Roth is, why didn't you just say that in the first place? Those two writers are nothing like each other! John Irving wrote the most political novel - The Cider House Rules is really the most intensely political novel, Garrison Keillor is a liberal spokesperson now, he hasn't been neutral since he was on the radio . . . I didn't really mean political, I mean concerned with formal experimentation. "I have no interest in avant-garde pretensions. Which is very, very different from saying I have no interest in serious literature. Pretension is the word - simply because I declare myself to be difficult, I am therefore worthy of extraordinary status and attention. "That would have been a strange concept to Kafka, I think. His methods were not a style, they were not an attitude. They were written in his own blood. It's very easy to pick up an avant-garde attitude - it's very hard to write anything that's good, anything that really matters. And I think a lot of the most intensely emotional stuff, the most deeply engaged stuff being produced in the United States is writing you would consider avant-garde or experimental. They are all formally wacky." Does he feel a part of that? Socially, yes. David Foster Wallace and David Means are his best friends. In terms of his work, I still don't know. He got pretty aerated without actually telling me. "I don't mean to be sounding defensive. I fear that I've already laid down on magnetic tape some quite defensive statements." "You do sound a bit defensive," I say. "I'm not. I'm just asking you to help me to understand . . . We've gotten off on to nomenclatorial issues. We should get back to something having to do, perhaps, with the book in question." He has quite a lot of verbal flourish - I wouldn't call him mannered but I can imagine, when the time comes for Philip Seymour Hoffman to play him in the biopic, that his friends will be lining up with funny (affectionate, experimental) impressions. I think the book is a bit self-flagellating - charmingly so, but all the same. As he describes his broken marriage, for instance, something that in reality he must have some grievances about, it sounds like yet another instance of a rather sticky situation coming about through his loveable wrongness. Well, you can kind of see why he would be sensitive to the feelings of his ex-wife, Valerie Cornell, a novelist herself (yet when you look her up on a search engine, the first thing that comes up is a footnote on Franzen's college alumni profile. Infuriating.). Sorry, back to the flagellation. "I felt like I was making fun of myself. But that feels like a different thing to flagellating myself. Perhaps in England those two things are indistinguishable. A lot of what I'm writing about, if not important, is at least painful. Early on, I got a very anguished letter from the mother of the little boy who dies in chapter two. Not complaining, simply reporting that it was extraordinarily painful to see her story - which was the story of a mother losing two sons in the space of two years; another son of hers died of cancer, I believe - become a small part of my story. "When you do non-fiction, you have to be aware of that. I'm joking about stuff that was painful to me and painful to them. I managed to make a comedy of errors out of a marriage that was extremely important and also extremely painful ultimately. Again, a memoirist would be well-advised to tread carefully, don't you think?" His parents are no longer living but don't his brothers mind all this revelation? "One of them does. This other brother said, several times, I hope you're not going to do too much more of this. But they are good brothers. There was never any likelihood that I was going to be excommunicated by the family. They're grown up, their lives don't revolve around me." He thinks for a minute. "I present evidence of their lack of rage as a form of character witness on my behalf. If I were a jerk, they would be mad at me".