A Complicated Kindness is the story of Nomi, a brilliantly acute, confused, generous-spirited 16-year-old growing up in a Mennonite community some miles from Winnipeg. Its author, Miriam Toews, was raised in just such a place, and got out as fast as she humanly could (the day after graduating from high school). The narrative voice is so strong, it could carry the least eventful, least weird adolescence in the world and still be as transfixing, but the fact is, this community is compellingly strange. The shorthand for Mennonite is "like Amish, only in Canada" (there's a large Mennonite community in the US, too, but that rather spoils the analogy) - Nomi gives the terse specifics in the opening pages of the book: "We're Mennonites. As far as I know, we are the most embarrassing sub-sect of people to belong to if you're a teenager ... A Mennonite telephone survey might consist of questions like, would you prefer to live or die a cruel death, and if you answer 'live' the Menno doing the survey hangs up on you. Imagine the least well-adjusted kid in your school starting a breakaway clique of people whose manifesto includes a ban on the media, dancing, smoking, temperate climates, movies, drinking, rock'n'roll, having sex for fun, swimming, make-up, jewellery, playing pool, going to cities, or staying up past nine o'clock. That was Menno all over."  Mennonite diktats express a deeply-held horror of almost all aspects of modern life. Emphasis on "plain" dress means that, in some households, even buttons and zips are a sign of inadequate faith. Ownership of a Janis Joplin record is the most direct known route to hell, apart from all those millions of other routes. Literature is an irreligious diversion; indeed, the life of the mind outside worship is utterly abrogated. Toews's experience was by no means the full Mennonite monty. "My parents both had masters degrees, they were educated, so it was a very tolerant, liberal family within the grander scheme of things. We were allowed to read." Yet she recalls, in all the time she grew up, going to see only one film (Tom Sawyer): "I remember us all sitting there, sitting up really straight. And nearly fainting when the lights went down."   This faith sprang up as a frond of the Europe-wide radical religious ferment of the 16th century. In tenets, it is closest to Anabaptism, though there is also a Calvinistic tang to its competitive holiness. (Calvin believed that ascension to heaven was predetermined - your actions made no difference: you were either part of the elect or you weren't. And yet, a good sign that you were a member of the elect was the righteousness of your behaviour. So, unlike traditional Christianity, where there is a set of rules and you strive to live by them, this thinking compelled followers constantly to be finding new rules, the better to emphasise that they were inexorably heaven-bound.) Menno differed from the Anabaptists in his belief in law and order (Anabaptists loved to riot). This didn't stop him being persecuted, or his followers fleeing all over Europe (mainly to Russia), but it did mean that once they found a place where they could be tolerated (Canada, and parts of central America), their societies remained curiously static, since they posed no structural threat to mainstream society and were therefore never forced by clash or friction to adapt to new times.   Toews's novel is a wonderfully acute, moving, warm, sceptical, frustrated portrait of fundamentalist religion. Besides the fervent sanctimony, Mennonite communities are wilfully antique and retrogressive - they have lifestyle museums where regular Canadians and Americans turn up to point at the teenagers churning milk while trussed up in elaborately drab bonnetry. It sounds weird and rather sinister, like a petting zoo where the animals have opposable thumbs. Nothing expresses the falsity of the olde worlde parade better than an episode in the book where Nomi sets fire to her bonnet while having a sneaky fag and has to be dunked in some kind of rainwater barrel by a tourist. It's hilarious. The relationship between mainstream Canadians and the Mennonite communities is skewed - Toews says, "We were this quaint little society, charming, fun, kids go there for field trips the whole time. My own kids have been there. It's all very picturesque and simple. But it is a way of dehumanising Mennonites. It's not serious evil. But you'll hear people sitting at a table talking about Mennonites, 'Yeah, I was doing business with one of them', and others going, 'Really? They do  business?' There is that level of patronisation - is that a word? - that Mennonites experience all the time. But then they set up these museums to make money. They give people the horse and buggy because it's a money-spinner."   Toews grew up in just such a town herself - the events described in the book, she says wryly, are entirely fictitious, but much of the texture is located in her own early life. "I was very conscious of making sure that my character's relationships with the community were authentic. Mine were something else entirely. Obviously. But the emphasis in the town on punishment and shame, and joylessness, that degree of severity and intolerance - all those aspects I certainly experienced."   I get the impression that Toews's actual response to the absurd and abundant strictures was pretty close to her heroine's, but the defining events of the work, the desertion of Nomi's mother and older sister, are very clearly fictional. Toews was the first in her own family to quit the town of Steinbach, on which the fictional East Village is kind-of-yet-not-exactly based. (Toews says vaguely that the places have similarities. Though when I met her friend Reverend Moon (not the Moonies one), who thought - mistakenly, it turned out - that he would be passing through Steinbach on his way to pick up his son from Bible camp the next day, he said, "Why don't you come along? You can see all the places from the book!") Her older sister left two years after her, and her mother remained there until the suicide of her father six years ago. And there are elements of the protagonist's character - an immensely strong bond of care and duty to her father, her terminally ill friend, the needy next-door child, above all a precocious and touching selflessness - that Toews herself is far too humble to appropriate.   Toews realised she had to leave with a certainty and urgency that surprises me, because she doesn't seem anything like strident or abrasive enough to alienate anyone, not even religious nut-nuts. She reminds me a bit of Mia Farrow in Hannah And Her Sisters: laconic, fine-boned, slightly undefended, wearing her perspicacity and intelligence very discreetly. Upon leaving Steinbach, she travelled all over the place: to Montreal, to London on an exchange programme, working her way round to Europe on wages from a job in a bakery in Finsbury Park, north London. She took a film studies degree at the University of Manitoba, then moved to Halifax to study journalism, before settling in Winnipeg 12 years ago, when she was 28. It's a city of bafflingly broad streets and meticulous town planning. It used to be called the Chicago of the north, though isn't any more; it seems faded and contradictory. Most of the time, it feels like a warm, leftie, Bohemian utopia (that's a figurative "warm"; it's bloody freezing most of the year).   Unfailingly, wherever you go with Toews (it's pronounced "taves"), she meets people she knows, whose habits and interests she also knows, who congratulate her on the book, which, besides being so good, has also made a big noise. And she says, "Oh, well, you know ... How's Emerice?" trying to deflect the flattery, for sure, but also far more interested in people's daughters and aunts and such than in her own success. Winnipeg's the kind of place where it's very easy to find a vegan meal and very hard to get tickets to see Fahrenheit 9/11 unless you book a long time in advance. But, at the same time, there are more bridal shops than bars, which must be the best index of borderline depression a place could give you (you know, 18-year-olds feverishly trying to hold on to each other, rather than just getting drunk and seeing what happens). And the liberal pleasantries coexist with a disturbingly quiet racial tension, where all the tramps are Native Canadians, and Toews's neighbour's foster son was recently beaten to death in a car park. (Mind you, while I was marvelling at Canada's rotten underbelly, someone was shot in the face outside my local, so I'm not one to cast the first stone.)   The point is, though, while Winnipeg in no way approximates the isolation and rigidity of a Mennonite town, neither is it the farthest away from one you could possibly travel. It's only about 70 miles away, to start with, and shares the spookily uniform terrain. This area is -40C in winter, plagued by mosquitoes in the summer. Actually, the bugs probably aren't so bad, and cold you can protect yourself against, but the landscape is vastly, oppressively flat. You can fly from Minnesota to Winnipeg without seeing a single geographical feature, just endless, even fields, riven by the occasional correction line where the horizon interferes with the 90-degree arrangement of the boundaries. If you weren't used to it, it would drive you loopy. It is a characteristic of Mennonite communities that they congregate in places no one else would want to live; hard-core followers have formed enclaves in the most inhospitable bits of Paraguay.   Geography aside, Winnipeg is urban enough to be a breeze - albeit quite a strong one - compared with the farther outreaches of Manitoba (the state of which it is capital). Toews lives around the corner from her mother and sister, and there is a constant traffic of family members through her house. She still calls herself a Mennonite, yet calls herself agnostic at the same time. Alongside the Mennonite intolerance and peculiarity, the book draws a community of, well, enormous community spirit. "I remember a very nurturing, safe environment, everybody knew who I was, who my parents were, who my grandparents were, what part of Russia we were from originally. That was a really comforting feeling. Non-Mennonites, when they see that aspect of it, think it's a beautiful thing, and it is, but there's so much going on besides. So people who leave, people like me - and there are lots of us, especially in this town - have very complicated relationships with the places we grew up. We want to love them, and we do love them, but there's so much of it that's so harsh, so unforgiving."    Her life is shot through with this ambivalence. Many of her decisions have been taken along traditional Mennonite lines - she had children young (she was 22 when she had Owen; now she's 40, and her youngest, Georgia, is 14). She loves being a mother and has a fierce sense of family. "You know, these sacrifices you make of time and energy to raise your children properly, I wouldn't spend it any other way." And yet, to a religion run along patriarchal lines, where "a 15-year-old boy can stand up and preach, but a 75-year-old woman who's borne 13 children can't", the very fact of her assuming any kind of right to artistic self-expression, before you even consider how critical the book is of Mennonite ways, would have been enough, had she stayed in the fold, to spark one of those bizarre public shunnings where some or other miscreant is ejected from the church. This is substantially more life-changing than being barred from your local pub, say. While you could remain in town, it would be very difficult to make a living. It would be unlikely for anyone to talk to you. It sounds extremely Breaking The Waves.  In other ways, though, Toews's agnostic side shows itself in her pretty regular family set-up, which she describes in an endearingly abashed tone of voice. "I had my first kid as I was completing my BA. And, well, no, I wasn't married, see. I've only just recently got married, four years ago, in Vegas, because Georgia thought it would be a good idea. So I had Owen with this one guy, who has just disappeared - apparently he lives in Tokyo now. So I have to deal with this whole men-disappearing syndrome. But then I hooked up with another guy - oh, this sounds bad - but we're very happily together, we've been together for 16 years, and he adopted Owen and then we had Georgia together." It's funny, because Toews has a rounded, self-critical, open-minded, human kind of morality that amounts to what the best of people live by; and yet, at the same time, you get a whiff of the strictness of her upbringing, an intimation that the spectre of Menno once in a blue moon intercedes and chews her out. She maintains that, had she been writing a factual essay about the Mennonites, she would have been far more critical and damning than her protagonist ever is. But it's ambiguous: there's a lot of complicated fondness there. Which isn't to say that she hasn't, ultimately, come down on the side of Winnipeg liberalism. Her children weren't raised as semi-Mennonites ("Kind of Menno-lite?" she says. "No. Not at all. My mum would take them to church on the sly. It was like, 'Quick, your parents are hungover, let's go'.") "There are so many things in my life that would be completely not on within the conservative church. And yet I think of myself as a reasonably decent human being. With all sorts of flaws, you know, but still reasonably decent. If I did believe in heaven and hell, I would really, honestly, believe I was going to go to heaven."   The complexity of distancing oneself from one's formative faith is redoubled when the community is comically inbred (as Nomi remarks wryly, "Our gene pool has no deep end"). Doctrines can be rejected in a way that genetic legacy can't. Well, up to a point - if you all share the same chin, that's something you could handle, but there seems to be a melancholic streak running through this faith that can neither be ignored, nor wholly distinguished from the faith itself. While she was at the University of Manitoba, her philosophy tutor was discussing a young Mennonite who'd gone to Oxford on a Rhodes scholarship. "It turns out he was a cousin of mine. Of course. Right. He came from a very strict family and just couldn't handle the sudden freedom, the drugs, the sex, the total openness, the anything-goes attitude. And it's suspected that he killed himself, or that he overdosed on drugs. It doesn't matter how intelligent or academically inclined he was, the culture shock was still too huge."  This is instructive not just in the sense that you can't mention a Mennonite to any other without it transpiring they're related. Toews's family is scarred by suicide. She lost her father when, having suffered from manic depression since he was 17, he threw himself in front of a train. She wrote Swing Low, a factual account of his life and illness, in 2001, to great acclaim. Another, much closer cousin also killed herself. Perhaps all families, were they to stay close enough to track each other, would find a pattern this brutal, but I doubt it - besides, most families simply aren't inbred to this degree and never have to consider that the isolated temperament of their forefather might be echoing down through centuries.   That gives an impression of what it's like to be an ex-Mennonite, or a semi-Mennonite, or a "liberal" Mennonite that is way too bleak properly to describe Toews or her family. Her husband, Neil, was also raised a Mennonite, though not in the most rigid, conventional way. Neil's relationship with his branch of the Menno clan (the two families' names are Harder and Dix. Well, it made us laugh, and they must have been laughing over it for years) is distinctly different from Miriam's - they go to family reunions and such, but he has no nostalgia for the religion itself. He laughingly says they were nasty, money-grubbing people (certain Mennonites, this is, not his family), with a verifiable record of peddling drugs to the faithless as a business venture. This does sound unpleasant - even though the net result is the same, it's way more cynical when people spin cash out of a vice that they specifically disavow. But this has to be set against a long record of humanitarian aid - many of the families who sponsored immigrants, notably Vietnamese boat people, were Mennonites, and the religion has a tradition of supporting foreign communities with money and medicine.   It's not all peaches, in other words, but peaches exist, within reason. And Miriam's mother, Elvira, has a different perspective still. (She's a brilliant raconteur, and extremely supportive of the book, especially considering that its central event is the mother's desertion and she's had people ask if it's a true story. When she lives round the corner from both her daughters!) Having left Steinbach, Elvira is still a Mennonite and attends their church in Winnipeg. She gets the magazine, which has headlines such as Your Only Way To Heaven Is To Understand And Admit That You Are A Complete Failure. And yet, again, she is ambivalent about the community in which she spent her adult life. Or, rather, she is bemused at how little she misses it. She never visits; she finds this perplexing but not distressing.   But then, of course there would be multiple perspectives. Toews's work never claimed to be a definitive portrait of the right-thinking response to anything. It is a work of fiction and, while the peculiarities of the environment give it its flesh and structure, the beauty of it is all in the prose, which is so sensitively and delicately balanced that the most caustic humour and poignant act of love can coexist in the same line. It reminds me a bit of George Saunders's Pastoralia, to which Toews replied very warmly, "Oh, he's brilliant. And very nice."   "Is he a friend of yours?"   "No, but he returned an email my friend sent him. Which I thought was really nice of him."   The impossibility of writing without humour consigned Toews for a long time to the comedy circuit. She won countless humorist prizes for her first two novels, which she's keen to point out she was very grateful for, before adding, "The British are actually a lot more appreciative of the comic. In Canada, if you're perceived as a comic writer, there's a real snobbery and you can't be serious. You're not a big hitter."   Her favourite authors are "British men, mainly - Irvine Welsh, James Kelman, Patrick McCabe". There's a lot of courtesy here, though; I wouldn't put it past her to be just saying that to make me feel welcome, or so that I would have read them and so not feel stupid. I mean, I'm sure she does like them, I just bet there are some Americans or Canadians or, who knows, a whole host of other nationals whom she likes as well.   Toews's next book is currently just a series of impressions, nowhere near finished, lacking a basic structure of any kind, she says, frowningly, as if she'd forgotten for a while that there was something she really ought to be getting on with and had suddenly remembered. "I have a problem with beginnings ... and endings ... and middles. But I don't know what else I would do. I find it very, very difficult to write. It takes everything, it's physically and mentally and emotionally exhausting for me. And my neighbours. And my dog."   It never shows, the exhaustion. The book is fascinating, and resonant, and inexorable - but then, it's like trapeze, isn't it? That's the way this stuff is supposed to work