There are times in the Commons when the only tolerable response is to throw food. Sadly this is not allowed. Nor may we shout at MPs from the public and press galleries. Otherwise we'd be constantly yelling "Next!", or as they would say in the comedy clubs, "Taxi for the minister!" The urge to interrupt the proceedings is often strongest when members are trying to be funny. This is usually like watching a walrus attempting to tap-dance: you admire the effort rather than the result. Today Harriet Harman, leader of the house, was standing in for Gordon Brown who was at the climate change conference in Copenhagen. Anne McIntosh, the Tory MP for Vale of York, saw her chance. "Copenhagen is the land of make-believe and fairytales," she said. "Does the leader of the house have a favourite fairy tale?" We groaned, silently, for we could guess what was coming. "Could it be The Emperor's New Clothes? Is she The Little Robber Girl, or is she really the princess?" Oh dear. Laugh? We almost started. A team of top French deconstructionists could have spent semesters on that question. The reference to the emperor's new clothes was, I suppose, something to do with the government thinking it had performed better than it had. Or that Gordon Brown was preening himself while wearing nothing but body hair and goose pimples. Who can say? I don't know which princess Ms McIntosh had in mind, since there are several. As for The Little Robber Girl, no doubt this was meant to evoke high taxes, yet the actual story is horrible, involving mass murder and hideous cruelty. It is the kind of tale that was probably read to kids who have gone on to coin millions with misery memoirs: "Mommy chained me to the radiator, and Daddy read me The Little Robber Girl, every night." Anyhow, Ms Harman was prepared, sort of. She leapt up and said: "We could all learn a lesson from fairytales, which is that you need to avoid" – and here she waved frantically at the Tory front bench – "the brothers Grimm!" She kept on talking, but we couldn't hear. Labour MPs, who had been largely sitting in a grumpy and morose silence, suddenly erupted as if it were the funniest political barb every fired. They rolled round in fits of comedy delight, slapping their thighs and holding their stomachs as if afraid that the force of the laughter inside them might make them explode. I began to suspect that the noise had little to do with the quality of Hattie's joke but the fact that she had made it – and had said something brief and crisp in contrast to the endless vague rambling she had offered before. The row did not stop: it grew more raucous, and in the end the Speaker had to intervene. Good humour was one thing, disorder another, he said. The public wanted to be reassured, not disgusted. A good point, but it may be a bit late to worry about public disgust now.