The Chilcott inquiry heard from Sir John Scarlett yesterday, a spook as different from the spooks of popular fiction as you might meet beside a hollow tree in St James's Park. Present him with a dry martini and an evil billionaire who wants to take over the world, and I suspect he would be dashing off home to spread more John Innes on his roses. What he does have is a remarkable grasp of modern-day management-speak. Clearly this is far more important now than skills at codebreaking and driving fast cars. Before we were two minutes into his evidence, we were talking about "structure, output and tasking." "Bond, I want you to make sure you stay within structure and output guidelines. And no more tasking gorgeous women." The room where the inquiry is taking place is small and stuffy, with pipes running across the ceiling, so it resembles an interrogation chamber in some anonymous military building. As so often, my mind drifted  in this case to Berlin during the 1950s. George Smiley, played by Sir Alec Guinness, is being briefed by John Scarlett, an up-and-coming operative. All jargon comes from yesterday's session. Smiley gazed at the lights reflected in the Spree. Berlin was bitterly cold at that time in winter, but it was not just the chill that made him shiver under his greatcoat. A slender figure slid beside him. It was young Scarlett. "I hear that Kalashnikov was a disappointment." "Oh, I don't know, sir. The interrogation was never formulaic, always substantial and often robust." "Did you get anything worthwhile?" "Well, sir, obviously we had to pay close attention to the requirements and priorities round, and bear in mind the formulation of the medium-term work programme, coupled with other short-term priorities." Smiley grunted. A young couple, screeching with merriment, went past on their way to a bar or nightclub. The girl was clearly drunk and her boyfriend seemed to be almost dragging her along. Not for the first time, Smiley wondered about the coming generation. "Did you see the minister?" "See the minister, sir? Sorry, I don't know what you mean." Smiley sighed. Sometimes it was like dealing with people for whom English was a second, even a third language. "I mean, did you brief the minister of defence about what Kalashnikov told us?" "Oh, gosh, I see, sir! You mean did I interface the customer?" "Yes," said Smiley with infinite weariness. "I suppose that's what I mean..." They actually talk about ministers, army chiefs, etc as "customers". And they don't meet them but "interface" them. Sir John Scarlett is older now, and has learned the techniques of the civil service. For example, he let Tony Blair off the hook when he said there had been no pressure to "firm up" the dossier on Iraq's weaponry. But, he was asked, his dossier was an assessment of the WMD campaign, not a threat assessment. That was all implied in the alarming foreword, written by Tony Blair. "The foreword was overtly a political statement signed by the prime minister, so it was his wording and his comments. I didn't see it as something I could change." The stiletto sinks in before the victim has even spotted it.