The Tories must be glad that the new leader of Ukip left their party years ago. At a time when David Cameron is trying to shorten the names of any Tory who sounds even slightly toffish, the last thing he wants is another old Etonian, especially one named Malcolm Everard MacLaren Pearson, Baron Pearson of Rannoch. I suspect that he would be even less willing than Annunziata Rees-Mogg (Nancy Mogg) to have his name shortened to, say, Mal Pearce. What's more, M.E.M.P.B.P.O.R has a set of views – being anti-gay, anti-Muslim and pro almost any form of hunting – which would curl the neck hair of Tory frontbenchers such as Georgie Oz, Andy Lans, Frankie Maude and others, some of whose names have been conveniently pre-shortened, such as Tess May, Bill Hague and Eric Pickles. And Lord Pearson received £100,000 over six years by claiming that his £3.7m house in London was his second home. And he owns 12,000 acres in Scotland. In short, he is everything Davy Cam is trying to get rid of, or at least brush under the carpet. Anyhow, Lord Pearson is now in office, and has annoyed many in Ukip by saying that if the Tories ever promised a referendum on our continued membership of the EU he would disband his own party. Today in the House of Lords he asked the government whether they would hold a referendum. The answer, from Glenys Kinnock, was "no". She added that his offer to liquidate his own party was a "rather original approach to leadership". In fact, everyone patronised him, and once you have been patronised by their lordships, you stay patronised. Lord Tomlinson announced gravely that Lord Pearson had shown "a standard of leadership which screams that the other party leaders do not have a great deal to worry about". Lord Dykes, a peer who believes we will be better off governed by Belgians and Luxembourgeois, who know better than we do how to govern ourselves, said it was an eccentric state of affairs. Lord Pearson qualified for the Guinness Book of Records as the only new party leader who had caused a mass resignation three days after he had taken office. Lord Pearson will not, I suspect, fret too much about this criticism. Back in the Commons, Liam Byrne, who is number two at the Treasury, was making a statement with the risky title of "smarter government". This seemed to involve cutting the deficit by saving money. But no member of this government could ever say anything so simple. Instead, Mr Byrne, who collects jargon like Madonna collects babies, told us his plans would "make it easier for civic society to contribute to public life by pressing ahead with the new social investment bank and by testing social impact bonds". He would also "free up the front line to innovate collaborate [sic] by cutting back on ring-fenced budgets and national targets … joint ventures and regulatory flexibility". The low droning sound of Mr Byrne describing his incomprehensible plans was suddenly cut by an agonised cry from Sir Patrick Cormack: "Can you PLEASE speak English?