A great PM's questions. But first, a moment in British constitutional history. On Tuesday I reported that Sir Peter Tapsell, one of the last knights of the shires, had been reselected. That morning, another thunderously grand knight, Sir Patrick Cormack, announced he would not be standing again. I am told these two events are closely connected. Both men were desperate to become father of the house. But now it seems almost certain that Sir Peter (known as "Blofeld" on the Labour benches) will succeed. For Sir Patrick this is a devastating time, and all our thoughts are with him. He sat behind his rival, in easy backstabbing distance, but being the ultimate gentleman, Sir Patrick refused to take advantage. Meanwhile, Gordon Brown and David Cameron were knocking seven bells out of each other. The Tory leader wanted to know why Britain was the only G20 country still in recession. Gordon Brown made a mistake. He said that Spain was in recession, and six other EU members were too. I assume he meant Latvia, Bulgaria, etc. This is like saying,: "No, I am not the stupidest boy in the class. Snotty Wilson got one less than me in maths." It is better left unsaid. He went on to say Cameron was "talking down Britain". This is always a sign of the end. John Major used the line in the dying days of his government. Any criticism was "talking down Britain". It was weedy then and it's weedy now. Cameron riposted that Brown had promised we would "lead the world out of recession". Brown did what he always does, and accused the Tories of having no policies. The sound in the chamber grew louder and louder as he shot: "The voice might be that of a modern PR man, but the mindset is the 1930s!" "That must have sounded great in the bunker!" snapped Cameron. Brown fought back with his trusty if rusted old sword, the Tory policy of raising the inheritance tax threshold – for, he usually adds, the rich people on Cameron's Christmas card list. This time Cameron was ready. The Labour party was the only party which had already legislated for an increase in the inheritance tax!  Brown wriggled – for him, quite deftly. He brought up the fact that the Tory candidate Zac Goldsmith was a multimillionaire who paid no British tax on his offshore income. Clearly he and Cameron had dreamed up inheritance tax policy on "the playing fields of Eton". The battle of pre-cooked, boil-in-the-bag soundbites was getting nastier. A Labour MP raised domestic violence. The actor Reese Witherspoon had spoken about it that morning. Mr Brown paid tribute to "Renny Wutherspoon". Scottish readers: don't hesitate to tell me this is the way it's pronounced in east Scotland, you English bigot! Witherspoon once played the wife  of Johnny Cash. Or, as Labour MPs would sing, "Because you're mine/I toe the line". Finally, Sir Peter Tapsell was called. All sides gave him an immense cheer. The prime minister had said that there would soon be 300,000 troops fighting in Afghanistan, the same number as the Soviets who were humiliated there. Should the prime minister not RESIGN? (Or as Sir Peter, who has a slight speech impediment, put it, "WESIGN!")