Normally I would not dream of quoting from a private letter, but Sir Peter Tapsell has topped his note to me "Personal (up to a point!)" so I assume he will not mind my sharing the splendid news with you. For on Friday last, Sir Peter was readopted to contest the general election in the Conservative interest for the constituency of Louth and Horncastle. It will be his 15th campaign, and he will almost certainly have turned 80 by the time it takes place. You could almost hear the huzzahs ringing down from Lincolnshire! What makes his victory especially piquant is that as part of his 45-minute speech to the Conservatives, he read out part of one of my sketches. This was from 2006, shortly after Tony Blair had claimed that God would judge him on Iraq. At the time I compared Sir Peter's interventions to watching Alfred Brendel and George Best in action. (I was tempted to rewrite the Tommy Cooper joke: "Trouble is, George Best was a hopeless pianist and Alfred Brendel couldn't play football." But I didn't.) Sir Peter had finished his majestic question to the then prime minister, "Will he tell us which archangel is now beckoning him towards southern Afghanistan?" No wonder that, even in this youth-crazed world, Sir Peter was chosen again. Yesterday he was in his place listening to the prime minister make another statement about Afghanistan. Sir Peter believes that we should not have gone there in the first place, and that – since the Soviets could not hold the country with 300,000 men – our 500 extra troops will not make the slightest difference. Gordon Brown's statement required a certain understanding of metaphysics. The gist seemed to be that because our military intervention had been so successful, we needed more troops to make it even more successful. And we should send extra men now so that our lads could come home earlier. And the fact that several countries were threatening to remove their forces from Afghanistan meant that even more nations would be represented there soon. Hmmm. You can always tell when a policy is in trouble when the politicians start turning it into new cliches. "We need a military surge, complemented by a political surge, which is essentially an Afghan political surge," he said. Try prising the sultanas out of that cake! Sir Peter did not at first rise to ask a question. Instead he used body language, the Esperanto of the Commons, to express his deep dissatisfaction. He rested his hands on his lap aggressively, if you can picture that. He leaned forward and scowled. At one point he leaned back, folded his arms, and looked, simply, furious. The prime minister continued, deploying more weird pronunciations. ("Mastiff" armoured vehicles he calls "masteef" to rhyme with the French "canif". Al-Qaida is no longer "Alky Ada", the drunken old aunt. She has become Al, Kay, Ada – a music hall act of the inter-war years. Finally Sir Peter could bear it no longer. He stood up and, in his pomp, asked a question not about Afghanistan but Pakistan. So it was a disappointment for his fans, but our cup of good news was brimming over anyway.