We were gathered for the launch of an exciting new thinktank, ResPublica. It was particularly thrilling because David Cameron was there to pat the tank on the head and send it on its way. The launch was in a hotel conference room festooned with velvet drapes, chandeliers, tapestries and tiled pilasters. It looked like the entry hall of the most luxurious brothel in Bradford. Behind the platform was a placard announcing the aims of the new tank. "Radical solutions … revolutionise innovation … sustainable future," it declared. My law of reverse meaning states that if the opposite of something is obvious nonsense, it wasn't worth saying in the first place, as in "tinkering at the edges … sticking in the mud … using tomorrow's resources today!" The room was filled with 300 people. We asked a thinktank tankie who they were. "They are the great and the good of the policy world!" he replied. My heart began to ache and a drowsy numbness started to numb me, drowsily. David Cameron arrived. We hear that many of his shadow cabinet are deeply suspicious of ResPublica, which they fear smacks of socialism and some forms of rightwing fundamentalism. They see it as a freemarket Hizb ut-Tahrir. No wonder Mr Cameron did not stay long. "It's great to be at the launch of another thinktank in Britain!" he said, stressing the word "another" so giving his welcome a slightly sarcastic air. He galloped along. We had a broken society, broken politics, and a broken economy. We needed the "bigger society" – whatever that might be. And people were often in public services because they loved their work. "We have to unlock the love!" he exclaimed. The one and only begetter of ResPublica, its director, Phillip Blond, said the Tory leader's diary did not permit him to stay. I'll say. He was out of there like a cat chased by a dog on a skateboard. This left the platform bare except for Mr Blond, who spoke with such profundity that I found it hard to stay awake.  I was jerked into life when he pointed out how Conservatives had always been great liberators. They abolished slavery, and it was Tories who led the factory reform movement, "against Guardian-reading Manchester liberals". Heavens, Guardian readers get blamed for a lot, but I didn't realise that included child labour. "Profoundly individualating," he went on. "Reciprocality!" he demanded. "Universality should not be compromised!" He called for an "eco-structure for exchange and ethos". I would have paid more heed to these thunderous abstractions if Mr Blond hadn't looked like a cross between Gordon Brown and DCI Gene Hunt in Ashes To Ashes. "Policing the model," he said. ("Awright, Ms Campbell, better come wiv us, my girl, or you'll cop it.") "Economic actors," ("I'd love to buy a round, darling, but I seem to have become parted from my wallet.") "Postmodern verity … against an objective void." "Hear, hear, that needed saying!" as no one remarked. Finally it was over. The food afterwards was great.