A handful of Labour MPs turned up on the day after the Queen's speech. And most of them could scarcely be bothered to stand up and ask a question. Nobody believes in this thing. It's not worth the parchment it's written on. David Heath, for the Lib Dems, called it an abracadabra Queen's speech. "Shazam! The deficit halved at a stroke. Shazam! Poverty abolished around the world. This is fantasy politics!" Other MPs were fractious about losing the public's attention. Nigel Evans thought it "bizarre" that more people were interested in how John and Edward performed on The X Factor than in the new president of Europe. I don't know. The Irish twins have more in common than you might think with the various dreary factotums who are standing for EU president: (a) rather weird faces, (b) even weirder hairdos, (c) come from very small country, (d) no perceptible singing talent, and (e) unjustified but relentless ambition. In a desperate attempt to make themselves relevant, MPs drag in popular culture whenever they can. Peter Bone, the Tory MP who looks exactly like Sven-Gran Eriksson, said he hoped Harriet Harman would become prime minister. He claimed to be the founder "and, sad to say, the only member of Hots – Harriet's Official Tory Supporters!" This was a deeply embarrassing moment, as if Mr Bone had decided to make public a liking for rubber underwear. Ms Harman reacted rather like a young woman being wolf-whistled from a building site and pretended she hadn't heard. Or at least heard properly. "I had not realised that the hon member was hot," she replied. Some of us didn't know where to look, but he could not be stopped. "No, you're hot!" he exclaimed. Fresh trousers for Mr Bone! Michael Gove, the Tory education spokesman, may have been watching I'm A Celebrity … because suddenly he accused Ed Balls, of being "the Katie Price, the Jordan of the government. All he is interested in is being on the front pages, so he has massively inflated what he has to offer!" Oooh, missus!  Actually this was Mr Gove's attempt at revenge, for earlier he was the victim of a fine coup de thtre by Mr Balls. The education secretary said he was fed up with the Tories saying that GCSE exams had been dumbed down. He had with him a few questions from recent GCSEs. Would Mr Gove care to answer them? This from the additional science test: "Name the type of enzyme that digests stains containing fats." Mr Gove squirmed slightly but offered no answer. Mr Balls, who is a playground bully at heart, realised he had found a victim. "Explain how a fluoride atom can change into a fluoride ion! The hon gentlemen is well known as an erudite and intellectual man. What is the answer?" Then: "Does he want to try that? Wanna try?" He sounded like an aggressive thug chanting "Want some, do yer? Want some?" in a pub car park. Finally he demanded, from the maths paper: "Work out three and three-quarters minus one and two-fifths." Mr Gove again, sensibly, offered no reply. (It is two and seven-twentieths.) The bully had won.