It was the Threadneedle Spectator parliamentarian of the year awards today. Lord Mandelson was the big winner. (I wasn't a judge, so I am not to blame. Others know who they are.) He received his award for politician of the year from Boris Johnson. It was, Mandelson said, a great honour. He was the first winner since 2006 not to have been a member of the Bullingdon Club. Then he added: "This is another to add to the list of things I have in common with Boris. We both spent a long time in Brussels. We both had very public resignations. And we both have an overwhelming ambition to do everything we can to undermine David Cameron." From his right came harrumphing and denial. "Humph. No! No! Harrumph," cried Boris. This protestation might have been slightly more convincing if it hadn't been for Boris's own speech a short while before. This took the form of a mock-heroic address to MPs, who had created a "magnificent catastrophe" to distract attention away from the banking scandal. "How proud I am!" he said, addressing MPs, his former colleagues. "I want to give you the most massive plug – but unlike Jacqui Smith I would not dream of claiming for it – for the chaotic, shambolic handling which has brilliantly directed media and public anger away from the financial services of London!" Warming to his theme – and Boris never cools to any theme on which he has embarked – "you resemble Leonidas and the Spartans, or Clint Eastwood in The Bodyguard, standing in the path of public rage! You have taken the bullet for the bankers!" Why, he said, it was marvellous that MPs should win all these awards. They would each need a trophy cabinet from Ikea, or possibly John Lewis, to display them all! This would go on their additional costs allowance. The cabinet might be so full that it could damage a wall. They would need to grow wisteria on the outside of the wall. So: "It would be necessary to add a wisteria trimmer to the bill."  Did he mention moat cleaning, or duck houses, or flat-screen televisions? No, he mentioned only wisteria trimming. And who is the only MP to have claimed for wisteria trimming? Why David Cameron. You might need to be obsessed by politics, or by the control of climbing plants, to understand what he was talking about. But we knew. That is Boris's genius. He always gets it both ways. Most other award winners were just happy to get their gong and go. Kenneth Clarke, ironically named newcomer of the year, said the judges had made an old man very happy. Paul Farrelly, the Labour MP Carter-Ruck tried to silence over the Guardian's revelations of toxic waste dumping in Africa, was named inquisitor of the year and said it showed there was life in the "old dog of parliament". The Tory peer Lady Warsi was moving. She said she had been voted sexiest member of the House of Lords, "but in light of the fact that I've still got my teeth, that's not so extraordinary. "But I am the daughter of a Pakistani immigrant mill-worker, and I ended up in the House of Lords." We all applauded madly what a wonderful country we still think this is.