B> The following correction appeared in the Observer's For the Record column, Sunday May 23 2004</B><BR><BR>'A bit rich, but no class' (Comment, below) said 'they shirk the philanthropy of their American counterparts, from Rockefeller and Carnegie onwards', Andrew Carnegie was actually a Scotsman, born in Dunfermline, Fife. 
<BR><BR>
<B><HR size="1"></HR></B><BR><BR>
Funerals are difficult. Too basic, and they seem depressing. Too fussy, and they risk vulgarity. One remembers the apocryphal send-off for Woody Allen's grandfather, featuring a buffet table laden with 'a replica of the deceased in potato salad'. Last week, Chatsworth offered its idealised tableau of a British demise. A hearse bearing Andrew Cavendish, the 11th Duke of Devonshire, wound through parkland lined by ribbons of servants in black serge and starched white aprons. The spectacle summarised how the rich die, and how they live. Never, outside a Conrad Black dinner party, have so many below-stairs staff been gathered together. The scene could have been a flashback to the margarine-advert England of Stanley Baldwin, except that Chatsworth's 600 employees are closer to the cast of a club reps docusoap than to old retainers. Most work for the tourist trade, running playgrounds or supplying internet customers with 'Duke's hampers' (price £499, plus £7.95 delivery).  In 1799, the Duke's forebear was the fourth wealthiest man in Britain. Since then, the aristocracy, lacking the wit to invent unopenable milk cartons or flatpack tables, has slithered down the international rich lists. The modern toff has had to compress Adam Smith's three categories of landowner, businessman and labourer into one multi-purpose model. That is why the current Earl of Sandwich is stuffing tuna wraps and why the departing Duke of Devonshire was winged to his rest by short-order chefs from Jean-Pierre's Chatsworth bar.  These days, only tycoons and footballers exist like Bourbon kings. A £700 million lawsuit issued by Hollinger against Lord Black and his wife, Barbara Amiel, alleges that the Blacks' excesses included billing the firm for 'household staff, including chefs, senior butlers, butlers, under-butlers, chauffeurs and footmen.' The Blacks' invention of an Almanack de Gotha of the buttling classes intrigued the media less, however, than Lady Amiel-Black's tip to a Bergdorf Goodman store doorman.  It can't have been her creativity that rankled, since many journalists are more inventive with expenses claims. The fascination of the Blacks is, instead, their cocktail of grandeur and frugality, the rich people's traits that others most love to deride. The Duke of Devonshire, a humble man, gave to good causes in the noblesse oblige tradition of the 19th-century landowner, while Hollinger, so its lawsuit claims, paid or promised $250,000 to charities on behalf of Amiel-Black.  The rich are often stingy. Queen Mary was a kleptomaniac who helped herself to knick-knacks from other people's houses, while Ingvar Kamprad, the Ikea founder and the wealthiest man in the world, drives an ancient Volvo. Tycoons have tended, too, towards madness, partly because they can pay others to sustain their worst delusions. Hence the Mormon army employed by the dying Howard Hughes to swat any germ-bearing fly entering the airspaces near the sealed room where he lay watching Ice Station Zebra on a video loop.  Though often selfish and sometimes unhinged, the rich have seldom seemed so dislikeable as now. Maybe plutocrats have to try harder to impress. When anyone with a semi in the right bit of inner London is a millionaire, only dollar billionaires feel truly wealthy. And when the middle classes, too upper crust to dust, hire two million servants of their own, the oligarchy needs better status symbols. In the US, the co-founder of Microsoft has just arrived at a New Orleans conference in the world's largest private yacht. Paul Allen's acquisition has a deck the size of Old Trafford, a submarine in the hold and a fuel tank that takes $250,000 to fill. Think Barbara Amiel's charity budget in unleaded diesel.   Lower down the food chain of plutocracy, fat cats are thriving. Luc Vandevelde, of M&amp;S, received a £450,000 annual package for failing to beguile women with polyester suits and this spring's toeless tights. Vandevelde, though sacked, has so many other lucrative boardroom roles that he will barely make it through M&amp;S's five-items-only checkout.  Ken Clarke told me, when he was Chancellor, that he wished business leaders 'would show a decent level of restraint'. His departure from the Tory script was aimed at proto-fat cats such as Cedric Brown, who was paid like one of Lord Black's Shake'n'Vac army in comparison with today's CEOs. Ten years down the line, optimists dare to think that, if Gordon Brown gets to be Prime Minister, he will tax the rich an extra 1 per cent. That wish may be forlorn. So far, the Chancellor's tax and benefit policy has helped the worst-off and lifted 700,000 children out of poverty. But 3.6m others remain poor, and the income gap is being prised apart by a failure to redistribute wealth.  Reluctance to make the rich pay their share is partly down to the awe in which government holds new money. From the Beckhams to a record influx of foreign billionaires, high-rollers are lionised. The moderately wealthy don't complain, partly because a rentier lifestyle, once for the coked-up sons of earls, is now an aspiration for those with a Fulham postcode and a trust fund for the children. Poorer people are not, by instinct, jealous. And even if they were, militancy was neutered long ago by Thatcher.  Helping the rich is part of the national culture, just as buying the Big Issue, or giving money to beggars, is not. Those on average incomes tend to be embarrassed by the impoverished, while   cheerfully subsidising affluent dependents, such as the royal family. It would be wrong to think that Prince Charles is scaling down the monarchy's extravagance in his current visit to Mount Athos, a remote religious community he uses as a spiritual Champneys. The austere regime is leavened by the prince's habit of arriving, often on a yacht owned by the Latsis dynasty, with 30 suitcases, one police bodyguard, one folding bed, one satellite telephone and several coolboxes of Palace delicacies to replace the monks' inedible bean stew.  Supporting the royals has always been justified, however shakily, by the argument that they work for the public good. New plutocrats do not. With exceptions, such as the Sainsburys, they shirk the philanthropy of their American counterparts, from Rockefeller and Carnegie onwards. Unlike Edwardian aristocrats, they rarely feel compelled, by God, guilt or public duty, to plough an unnecessary penny back into the public domain.  Orwell's moneyed and ruling classes have impacted into one. Nancy Mitford's U and non-U categories are only for snobs with chilblains and defective heating systems. This is a society that disdains rank and prejudice, and which has just been promised a brand new equality commission to uphold high standards. And still, old hierarchies linger.  A hearse goes by, and few scoff at the battalions of retainers that watch it pass, or mock the self-reverence of the rich. Instead, there is a reflex twitch of nostalgia for feudal England. Maybe everyone is suffering from Trollope overload. Or perhaps the revamped squirarchy, custodian of art and purveyor of damson jam online, looks suddenly less alarming than new potentates.