Hush, hush, whisper who dares, Liam Fox is saying his prayers. The subject of the Shadow Health Secretary's discourses with the Almighty was discovered last week in a Conservative Christian Fellowship booklet containing a list of model political incantations. Fox's offering is a call on Tories to 'pray for a huge restriction, if not abolition, of the current abortion law'. In other words, he wishes the present 24-week limit on terminations to be much shorter. Ideally, he wants abortion outlawed altogether. God must be gratifyingly deafened with similar pleas. In the United States, Tommy Thompson, the Governor of Wisconsin, has been confirmed as Health Secretary. His view, that terminations should be criminalised, chimes with that of President Bush, whose first move on taking office was to abolish funding for international organisations offering abortion advice. Fox's repellent stance meshes neatly with American redneck social policy and with the Tories' leap aboard the celestial bandwagon.  Some time has passed since William Hague remodelled himself along the lines of John the Baptist, preaching in the Tory wilderness. Naturally, there were some modernising features. For a raiment of camel's hair, substitute a North Face Gore-Tex hiking jacket. Swap locusts and wild honey for a pint or 14 at a local hostelry and Judea for the North York moors, where Hague prefers to commune with his maker during a Sunday ramble.  Hague is a pantheist, who sees God in all places where there are a handful of votes to be garnered. He is also, presumably, a subscriber to the Malcolm Muggeridge view that, to succeed in public life, 'one must conform to the public image of a bookie or a clergyman'. Having sized up the odds on a Tory victory, Hague has deemed the latter course more fruitful. He has guested on Songs of Praise, preached to evangelists, absorbed the ayatollah credo of Pastor Marvin Olasky and ordained that 500,000 free newspapers outlining Tory policy will be shortly distributed to church-goers. At this rate, he may soon, like President Reagan, be evincing 'serious doubts about the theory of evolution'.  This is, of course, the time of the electoral cycle when politicians routinely dust off their religious credentials and serenade the spiritual vote. Before the last election, John Major divulged his habit of 'praying in all circumstances', while Tony Blair disclosed that his beliefs had driven him to join Labour. Then, as now, everyone obsessed over a decline in law and order. Relatives of the murdered (last time, Frances Lawrence, this time, Damilola Taylor's father, Richard) called for the 'moral regeneration' of Britain.  Here we go again, except that Blair, though backed in 1997 by nine out of 10 of the senior clergy, has learned that God and politics are a fissile mixture. His early sermonising was derided, family moralising was unpopular and his former Northern Ireland Secretary might still be in situ but for the Church's bleating that someone must cough up for a Faith Zone at the Dome. Barring Gladstone, no Prime Minister has been more entranced by the purpose of life than Blair. The Christians in his Cabinet include Gordon Brown, Chris Smith, Jack Straw and Michael (blessed are those with too many homes) Meacher. All have drawn a line between private faith and public policy.  Which leaves William Hague a clear field to tilt for the soul of Middle England. On the statistics, he does not have a hope. Forty eight per cent of Church of England members vote Labour, as against 26 per cent for the Tories. Neither Catholics (17 per cent Tory against 48 again for Labour), nor Muslims (22 per cent against 33) seem likely to be impressed by Hague's Damascene conversion.  His Bush-style, faith-based projects - under which the welfare state is bequeathed to the churches - disregards the fact that the vast majority of Americans believe in God, an afterlife and the notion that a guardian angel is clamped to their shoulder like a Trafalgar Square pigeon to Tony Banks's pate. More than a third go to church regularly, compared with 7.5 per cent in Britain, where the faltering Church of England is the doctrinal equivalent of Marks &amp; Spencer. Hague's barmy plan would founder on manpower shortages alone.  His wish to peddle piety like snake oil matters only because religion is gaining an insidious influence on politics. Scientific progress and a strong economy decree, in part, the growth of an ethical agenda which the Christian Right seeks to suborn.  Whenever the abolition of Section 28, or biotechnology, or gay sex at 16 is at issue, a gaggle of apoplectic archbishops proffer brimstone and damnation. Tomorrow, Baroness Young hopes to gather enough support from peers to stop pharmacies selling the morning-after pill. Last week, the Daily Telegraph solemnly exhorted the House of Lords not to endorse embryo cloning because 'Pope John Paul II would be disturbed'.  If his Holiness is truly to be granted such sway over the decisions of the British Parliament, it can only be a matter of time before he is advising on corporation tax and cold weather allowances for pensioners. By an inverse rule, the decline of church popularity has coincided with a disproportionate upsurge of grand standing on policy. That is due partly to the fact that belief is more strident than unbelief. Godless MPs swear their oath of allegiance on the Bible and fail to flaunt their atheism, hedging their bets along with an agnostic public. Of the 65 per cent of adults who say they are Christians while rarely going to church, many will abhor the views of hardliners who purport to speak for them. Others will be scandalised by social reform while holding no religious position.  Moral fundamentalists are not necessarily the same as Christian fundamentalists. Blair, the devout Christian, knows that liberal policies will lose him support in both camps. Hague, the strategic God-botherer, hopes that he can mop up the fall-out and win a few marginals. Tactics, not conviction, seem the issue. Hague gives the impression of someone who has not held a firm article of faith since he ceased to believe in the tooth fairy. That is precisely why his religious posturing is so unthreatening.  So how unlucky for him that Liam Fox, a true adherent to Catholic dogma, should enter the religious debate. If Fox believes in a return to back-street abortion, that is his own affair. To wish to transubstantiate that private view into law is the most stupendous cheek. Even Ann Widdecombe had the grace to admit that her views on abortion would render her an unsuitable Health Secretary. If Fox sees a conflict of interests, he has not mentioned it.  Instead, he has laid out the real agenda of the moral Right - prescriptive, undemocratic, nasty and cold-hearted. It hardly matters that his prayer for abortion reform will never be fulfilled. Already his comment has offered a bogus legitimacy to pro-life protest groups now clamouring for the Tories to fund their work And still, there is some reason to be grateful to Fox, who has offered a salutary cameo of what a Tory government, smiled upon by Bush and God, might seek to do. How lucky that it will not, barring miracles, have its chance. Even the irreligious should count their blessings.