LIKE PLOTTING Shakespearean dukes, the Anglican bishops ponder the affairs of the realm. The election must be in June, say York, Canterbury, Hereford and Carlisle, while Durham and Oxford plump for May. Quite why the timing is suddenly part of the ecclesiastical calendar is uncertain. Just as politicians would not presume to fix the date of the Church of England Synod meeting or the Nether Wallop parochial church-hall bring-and-buy sale, church leaders should have no leverage on when the country goes to the polls. Still, you have to admire their opportunism. Tony Blair had barely finished his speech to the Christian Socialist Movement, in which he advocated power and influence for faith-based groups, before the bishops, their flocks decimated by forces more pernicious than foot and mouth, invoked this proffered clout. The Prime Minister might not have meant his call for government tie-ups with religious bodies to be interpreted quite so literally, but once you start rendering unto God those things that used to be Caesar's, odd mutations follow.  The perils of mixing religion and politics are already apparent in the United States, where George W. Bush's plan to channel government aid to faith-based groups has stalled amid internecine rivalry on the religious Right and concern elsewhere about the spectre of taxpayers funding the Rev Sun Myung Moon's sexual abstinence programme in schools. Fusing private faith and public policy is rarely wise.  William Hague's attempt to annexe the religious vote is not a worry. His unworkable plan, based on the thinking of the Bush bible-basher, Marvin Olasky, to hand over parts of the welfare state to church groups, was pure expediency. Hague is to high theology what Heddon-on-the-Wall pigswill is to River Café minestrone, which makes his never-to-be-implemented brand of God-bothering wholly unthreatening. Blair's Christianity, genuine and heartfelt, is more disturbing, despite, or because of, the fact that he has no need to court the religious vote. He already has it in the bag. There was no overt zealotry in a sermon acknowledging the good work done by some faith groups and promising them a greater role in health projects and work with the young and the elderly, with offenders and ex-offenders.  But if the language was careful, the aim was not so different from Hague's. The Conservatives' God squad would substitute for state agencies, while Labour's volunteers will be partners. Many, like MP Martin O'Neill, worry legitimately about funding being skewed towards religious groups, about possible job discrimination between believers and non-believers and about services being delivered with a side order of preaching. As for the planned proliferation of church schools, Blair should know better than most people that parents are seduced not by 'moral emphasis' but by the un-Christian wish that their kids get a better education than everyone else's.  BLAIR'S SUBTEXT, including the implicit and erroneous notion that religion has a monopoly on altruism, is equally disturbing. As he also made clear, his religious faith is indivisible from his political judgment. Or, as he put it: 'Politics without values is sheer pragmatism .The two must go together.' Only up to a point. Religion, as David Hume argued against the consensus of eighteenth-century deists, is not rationally based but bound up in our emotional responses to life's glitches. Thus, when Euan Blair was found drunk in Leicester Square, his father reread 'The Village Church' and mused on God and how 'for thine own purpose, thou has sent/ the strife and the discouragement'.  One imagines that, with each heaven-dispensed dose of S&amp;D, from the Hindujas to foot and mouth, the Downing Street copy of Longfellow becomes ever more thumbed. Although Blair affects to be a scholarly theologian lurching between the (perfectly compatible) natural law theories of Thomas Aquinas and the utilitarianism of Bentham and Mill, he appears more at home with comfort-blanket Christianity. Like other forms of private succour, such as Valium, Horlicks or a litre tub of chocolate-chip ice-cream, religion has limited use in the public domain.  Faith, as Hume understood but Blair may not, takes off at the point where logic stops. For that reason alone, religion is the least useful spanner in the political toolbox. Piety is not, as Blair suggests, synonymous with values. In addition, for such an events-driven Prime Minister to claim that religion is a prescription against pragmatism is as specious as his suggestion that lack of faith has led to national cynicism. Voters are sceptical now not because they had too little belief in what this government might deliver but because they had too much.  However, you do not have to be very cynical to worry about the social tinkering enshrined in Blair's paean to religion, to marriage and to community; a holy trinity that acquired a new legitimacy last week, when Robert Putnam, the latest Labour guru (and the occupant of this slot last week), arrived for breakfast at Downing Street, puffed up on the stupendous banality that attaches to being what Bryan Appleyard breathlessly calls 'the most influential academic in the world today'.  The Putnam doctrine is a lament for the decline of faith-based and civic groups and for the demise of community. Blair is impressed. But why? We might as well bemoan the fact that we no longer aspire to be like Barney and Betty Rubble from The Flintstones. Community, like marriage, is often anachronistic and always over-romanticised. From the Mafia to the Krays, from the Ku Klux Klan to the juvenile knife gangs of Peckham, society's most destructive forces are imbued with the warm glow of community and tribalism.  Inclusive groups are, de facto, exclusive, too, and the traditional outsiders are women, the carers and nurturers whose efforts allowed men to construct sub-communities based round the office, the pub, the Freemasons, the golf course or the 10-pin bowling club whose demise gave Putnam his Albert Camus meets David Vine book title of Bowling Alone .  WHAT HE FAILS to see is that society is evolving away from old, faith-based communities not because of malign pressures but because people don't want to stay in Claustrophobia Mansions with the vicar and an extended family presiding over their lives. The Putnam dream has not been squandered but spurned by a generation to whom Labour's fondness for this reheated mush must seem barely comprehensible.  Six years have passed since the first wave of communitarian waffle, peddled by Amitai Etzioni, percolated Labour thinking. Etzioni's credentials were clonishly similar to Putnam's. He, too, was a distinguished American academic, beloved of Bill Clinton, admired by Blair and, according to his publishers, an influential force in the rewriting of Clause IV.  Whether or not that is so, it is certain that the ubiquitous mantra of 'rights and responsibilities' tracks back to Etzioni, whose contribution evoked some puzzlement from the outset. It seemed doubtful then that an anti-liberal, authoritarian movement uncluttered by worries over civil rights or individual autonomy, could ever take root in a Labour government answerable to a secular society.  It could. A parliamentary term on, we have an Identikit guru and yesterday's gospel of faith-based communitarianism rehashed for tomorrow's election. Who can blame the bishops for calling the date when politicians are busy dressing up dodgy social engineering as eternal verity?