Railtrack this week told its shareholders that "better times are to come". So they raised the dividend for shareholders by 5% (underlying inflation is 2%). That must have pleasantly surprised them on the day the company warned its profits were down by 31%. With the company near meltdown after Hatfield, the profit warning was only to be expected: £100m extra is being spent on crisis rail repairs, £150m must be paid to train-operating companies in compensation for all the chaos. But no worries, "Better times are to come".  Where are "better times" to come from? There is only one source and every reason for shareholder confidence that it will deliver: the Treasury's 10-year plan for the railways is investing £29bn of public money. Indeed, shareholders might expect continuing rises, for who controls how much of the subsidy given to this leaky bucket drips into dividends?  Not us, says the rail regulator: "That's a matter for a private company. No regulator ever comments on dividends or share prices of a utility." But this utility is different -dependent on state subsidy. Does the shadow strategic rail authority monitor dividends? Not us, they said: "Dividends are a matter for Railtrack alone to decide. You could try the rail regulator ... "No doubt the Treasury keeps an eye, but what sort of Chinese walls allow money pouring in one end to seep out the other?  Another question: which purchasers of Railtrack shares ever thought this company - alone among all Europe's railways systems - was ever going to make money, except via the cash-cow of government subsidy? With train tickets already the highest in the world due to decades of lowest subsidies, higher fares will not provide "better times" for Railtrack shareholders.  As for those train operators who have made money on profitable lines, with no cross-subsidy possible under this chopped-up privatisation, some have been busily reinvesting profits in transport systems abroad, says Transport 2000. So state money leaks from the railways that way too.  Railtrack is now worth £5bn. From 1997 to this March, Labour had already paid out exactly that sum in railway subsidy, with much more to come. So why doesn't the government own it by now - or at least a significant slice of the shares? Why has it got nothing at all for our money? If the exchequer were a bank it would have repossessed this effectively bankrupt business long ago in exchange for its lost cash.  Forget sleaze, forget Aitken's lies and Hamilton's brown envelopes. Of all the scandals that engulfed the Major government, nothing tops the reckless, ideological sale of British Rail. They were drivers who went through a score of red stop signals, feet on the dashboard, swag-bag hanging on the dead man's handle. They were told countless times by their own experts that it could not and would not work - especially in the shambolic form they chose. They pushed it through a month before their deserved demise, leaving this dynamite on the tracks of their successors.  It was a deliberate and wicked piece of political vandalism. Boys putting bricks on the line would be in prison, but they sit on boards: there is no redress against ministerial malpractice. When you ask them, they say they have nothing to apologise for. "No regrets," said Sir George Young yesterday. Same goes for John MacGregor, though he adds in sanguine tones, "Of course we would always have made a few changes as it went along."  What sort of changes? Probably much the same as Labour's - dollops of dosh. The reason Margaret Thatcher wanted to privatise British Rail was the very reason it was impossible - it always required a huge state subsidy. Only absurdist upside-down accounting could ever produce figures that could make it look "private". John Major cannot have believed figures that budgeted for an ever-decreasing state-subsidy, de-escalating year by year: this year, according to their fantasy accounts, subsidy should have dipped well below a billion. Instead, it's up and up.  Back in the mists of time it began with the Adam Smith Institute, the very clever far-right thinktank that devised the poll tax. If John Major was still in power, no doubt recent rail events would have brought him down as surely as the poll tax destroyed Mrs Thatcher. The institute's first clever idea which Mrs Thatcher briefly fancied, was to tear up all the rails and put toll-roads in their place. Ideas puffed up and down the line but rightly got nowhere.   Finally John Major grasped at it, needing a privatisation of his own. His Hovis view of Britain imagined a Hornby railway in the old private liveries of the Great Western and Great Eastern. But market ideology demanded competition, not regional monopoly, so BR was sliced all ways - cut into regions as well as split between track and flotillas of train operators, 150 contracts dispersing accountability like confetti. Who is to blame? All of them - John Major most of all. (Does he write condolences for the fatalities?)  The rails were sold to Railtrack for just £1.93bn, the whole of BR raised only £5bn, a disgracefully low price: they pretended they were getting rid of a liability. Asked yesterday who was to blame for this gross fiscal negligence, those Tories said, amazingly, it was Clare Short's fault. Why? Because as shadow transport minister, she vowed Labour would renationalise it, which depressed its selling price.  Of course, all such talk was stopped dead by pre-election New Labour, afraid of old Labour imagery. Besides, they said, money must be spent on transport renewal, not on compensating shareholders. But did they realise they'd be investing more than 15 times enough for Railtrack to fall back into their hands anyway under normal rules of business, if they wanted it?  For some reason, they don't want it, though the longer they are in office, the more they take the blame anyway for anything that happens on the railway. Voters' memories are short, train delays long. Prudence would take back what is already paid for and put it in a trust, able to borrow money. Train operators can fall back as their franchises expire.  Labour cannot do the same to London Underground. No, they say, it's quite different. Not different enough. The New York subway genius, Robert Kiley, a wise and astute politician, may find a third way face-saver to rescue both Labour and Ken Livingstone. But if Kiley walks away declaring the PPP unworkable, there will be no rescuing Labour.  Imagine the next tube disaster: (they happen roughly every 15 years, it's now year 13.) Labour ministers and 51 London MPs must each take personal responsibility on this. All "privatisation" of publicly financed services - hospitals or trains - makes profit straight from the public purse. The idea that their superior efficiency earns those profits is a fairytale that died at Hatfield.  