In 1990 the BBC mounted a campaign of race awareness within its ranks, compelling all managers and heads of department to attend a race awareness course. Collective hackles bristled with indignation. Institutionally racist? Us?  It caused considerable outrage. To be sure, there were far too few black faces in high places or indeed anywhere around except among the cleaners, but we thought our entry system fair.   I was social affairs editor and my department covered issues of racism regularly. What more did we need to know? Indeed, at the time we were regularly defending ourselves against allegations by a Conservative government and hostile Tory press that the BBC was a pinko lefty nest of subversives, which added to the affront at being subjected to race awareness training.  The Asian course instructor was surprisingly abrasive, the managers defensive, under attack for unconscious, thoughtless, instinctive racism. Only imagine waking up one morning black, you really think the world would look the same, eh? Confront it, accept it.   That's as may be, some managers replied, but they protested vigorously that the BBC had the fairest system of appointment boards for every job and promotion, attended by the personnel department to prevent an inside fix.   The jolt of the race awareness course did make a difference, though other initiatives were probably even more important. It did make me go out of my way to recruit new young black researchers to our department. Special BBC entry courses for ethnic minorities went out and recruited people who might never have applied or got through the many hurdles.   Once many of those entrants excelled, a psychological barrier was broken, the myth of our 'merit' system exposed. In 1990 only 2.8 per cent of the staff were black but a target was set to bring this in line with the general population by 2000, which, at 7.4 per cent has virtually been reached.They are still mainly at or below Band 8 (senior journalist or producer) with only 2 per cent in the highest echelons, so higher targets are being set.   