A good week for Jack Straw. Waving goodbye to General Pinochet, one troublesome foreigner less "swamps" his in-tray. But another 104,000 remain to be dealt with - that mountainous backlog of asylum-seekers. W hile they all wait for years for an adjudication, the Afghans have been judged in no time at all and are now deftly removed from tabloid front pages with the stern announcement that only two (plus dependants) can stay. At the same time the Times carries a very satisfying front page story that "Jack Straw is demanding a complete overhaul of the United Nations convention on refugees in an attempt to stem the tide of asylum seekers entering Britain". Yes, all in all, a good week for the home secretary.  Bogus asylum seekers are the problem. But everything connected with policy on asylum seekers is bogus. Most of what the government says is bogus: it relates neither to what it does nor to what it thinks. Much newspaper reporting is bogus, with any stray bad-hat case tarring all refugees. Tory politicians' exploitation of this is bogus opportunism. And liberal hand-wringing about asylum policy is sometimes bogus: an open immigration policy, desirable or not, is impossible politics yet they would reject any actual immigration policy.  There is no honourable policy available on immigration. Keeping foreigners out will always be a disreputable business likely to make decent people recoil. Romanians, Albanians or citizens of the former USSR, we turn away people from pretty nasty countries, if not quite nasty enough, or from very poor countries and poverty is not a crime.  There are only better and worse ways of handling what will always be a bad business. But we have not done well, even by that relativist standard. Our home secretary's remarks about the Afghans shocked even the Wall Street Journal into writing an angry editorial - hardly a liberal newspaper.  Now the Afghans have been dealt with - sort of. Day after day these "bogus" hijack victims in their £200-a-day Hilton hotel rooms were splashed across the tabloids.  The Mail's leader said: "We'll wager that most 'victims' of the Stanstead hijack are still enjoying life on benefits in Britain, five years hence," and Straw had to prove them wrong fast, as well needing to deter future hijacks. So the remaining planeload may be auctioned off to other countries. This could start a whole lucrative new world trade with the poor world selling entry permits to the rich world yearning to breathe free of its refugees.  Straw barked loud enough to drive the Afghans off the Mail's front page, but the story they were running instead was a cracker.  The Nistor family arrived hidden in a lorry from Romania in 1998, applied for asylum as persecuted gypsies and while awaiting adjudication have a council house in Hillingdon. Cheating on social security, the men in the family work on construction sites and this week one mother was arrested yet again begging with her improbably named son, Lucifer, in the London tube.  A gem, bang to rights - that shows the kind of people scrounging off our soft asylum laws, a story to stick in the public mind for a decade. Against that tide of opinion Jack Straw has to swim hard and Labour's polling shows they are losing. "Swamped" is what people believe.  How should they regain public trust in the asylum system? Not by throwing petrol on the flames. Every time they appease the mob it stokes up demand for ever more draconian measures.  When Jack Straw called for a complete overhaul of the UN convention and a new EU directive on immigration it sounded the right kind of tough stuff. "We shall be raising our concerns with like-minded countries," Straw says. Who? Austria, perhaps. That's how it came across.  In fact he means overturning some rather bizarre recent interpretations of the UN convention by our own appeal court, far looser than any other in Europe: in one case asylum seekers entering through Europe were allowed to stay because our court declared France and Germany unsafe. These are our own domestic legal problems. The government does want the UN to introduce the system used over Kosovo whereby all countries take agreed quotas of refugees from trouble spots, a reasonable proposal. But as he keeps declaring the UN convention outdated it sounds, perhaps conveniently, like a headlong repudiation of the UN refugee principles. When challenged, it's denied. But where are the rousing speeches in favour of human rights and saving the genuinely persecuted?   Some facts: Britain takes just under the European average of refugees (measured per capita of population: Luxembourg can't take as many as Germany).  In the 10 years 1988-98 a total of 58,350 were allowed to settle here - hardly a "swamp", though it is rising. Under Michael Howard, 80% of applications were rejected. Dealing with fresh cases, the government estimates the underlying rate at about 30%. It is the monster backlog that causes the problem and offers such delectable pickings to the Mail. The maladministration of the whole asylum system is the problem - Straw's fault, not the law's.  For two years Straw wasted time and millions of pounds trying (but failing) to impress the mob with draconian measures to disperse asylum seekers around the country to camps, hulks or anything that can be made to sound horrible.  Tough new rules start in April. But tinkering with punitive vouchers for food to send out deterrent messages, they took their eye off the ball. What matters is a system that deals with new arrivals fast and expels those refused entry promptly. (Look at the speed with which the Afghans were adjudicated.)  The refugee council is broadly satisfied with the adjudication system itself, but says the injustice is in delays. Too late, the government has put a lot more money into adjudication and for the first time last month the number of cases dealt with exceeded the number of new arrivals. But it still needs more money and more officials.  Only after nearly three years is Straw finally drawing up new plans to remove those who lose their case. Until now (and under Howard), sheer bungling meant few people refused entry were ever actually deported. It is not new policy that Straw needs but simple good administration inside his own hopeless home office.  Unless the government holds the line and explains loudly why taking in refugees is a good thing, the refugee council fears that public anger at a few cases like the Nistors will get out of hand.  Open aggression towards refugees is on the rise and appeasement only encourages yet more xenophobia. Why not praise the wealth of cultural riches refugees have brought with them? International conventions may need technical reform, but Labour should be persuading the beastly British of the noble principle of the UN convention, not undermining it.