Ministers will today unveil plans for a Universal Bank to ensure that all the 3.5m citizens without bank accounts get access to the same basic financial services as the better off enjoy. The venture, run through the country's 19,000 post offices, will mean that people on the lowest incomes will have access for the first time to cheque books and cash withdrawal cards, as well as reasonably priced loans to help them steer clear of loan sharks who charge exhorbitant interest rates.  The bank will be part of a multi-million pound programme to save thousands of threatened post offices from closure and transform the network into a national agency providing information on a wide range of local and national government services, from benefits advice to details of evening classes.  Postmasters and postmistresses will be encouraged to take on a new proactive role as community entrepreneurs - to be known as "government general practitioners" - dispensing information and support on matters such as form filling or internet use.  Funds will be available to modernise premises and improve security, as well as to open new branches in post office "deserts".  The rescue plan is intended to address the crisis faced by thousands of sub-post offices because of the imminent loss of their government contract to pay out benefits and pensions, responsible for around a third of their income.  The trade and industry secretary, Stephen Byers, unveiling the plan today, will stress that the fund will tackle the "hidden problem" of closures in run-down inner city areas, as well as the issue of rural post office closures.  The extent of closures in the most deprived urban areas and on run-down estates will be revealed today in a report by the government's performance and innovation unit. Some 3,000 post office branches have closed across the country in the last 20 years. Just as in rural areas, post offices are often the last facility remaining in inner cities when shops and high street banks close down or move out, the report will say.  Ministers are anxious to portray the extra help for post offices as much as a heartland issue, targeted at traditional voters, as assistance for the rural shires.  The new Universal Bank (originally to be called the People's Bank until ministers grew concerned at the name's eastern bloc ring) will be set up with seed money from the government. Pressure will be put on the big high street banks to help get the service off the ground. Following the banks' much criticised rapid withdrawal from rural areas and unprofitable poor urban districts, ministers believe that the institutions have a moral obligation to contribute to the new enterprise.  The government was forced to find a mechanism to provide universal banking facilities because of plans to pay all benefits and pensions directly into bank accounts by 2003. Now the payments will go into the new Universal Bank accounts but can also be collected as before over the counter at post offices.  The decision to centre the service on the post office network came after research showed that people with no bank accounts were confident about using post offices, but found the high street banks intimidating and unfamiliar.  Another key benefit, ministers believe, will be the chance for poorer customers to take advantage of discount schemes of up to 10% offered by utility companies to customers who pay gas or electricity bills by direct debit, and obtain credit and loans at reasonable rates.