In late-night newsrooms, bored reporters on the dog-watch play at fantasy news. What if...Princess Diana found alive, Pope elopes, Baroness Young in lesbian love triangle. And then suddenly it happens - Euan Blair drunk and incapable, vomiting in Leicester Square, arrested and taken to a police cell. On cue, to deadline, it's the very day his father has been battered in the Commons for that speech promising to give police "powers to deal with drunken anti-social behaviour which causes offence and misery in too many towns and cities". Did young Euan also oblige by "throwing traffic cones around the street or hurling abuse into the night sky", loutish behaviour his father threatened with spot fines at the cashpoint? We know little. All we know is that here is a story to make heathen newshounds believe there is a God after all. (And may cause Tony Blair doubts on the same score.) Any chortles from enemies of left or right are strictly private. (Yes, private jokes abound referring to the government's largely unused child curfew orders. Might the Blairs be ordered on to a course for failing parents on one of the new parenting orders?) But in public the amalgamated union of professional politicians wisely closed ranks: there but for the grace of God go any of the children of Westminster's denizens. Is there a sane parent anywhere who does not sympathise? Is there a teenager anywhere who doesn't view with horror what adolescence must be like inside Number 10? The best hope is that this was just a case of a kid getting drunk after exams as most others do - an almost obligatory rite of passage that, with luck, leaves most of them so horribly sick they are determined never to get that out of control again. As Alastair Campbell said acidly at his daily press briefing, "Euan won't be the only one who got the worse for wear but he will be the only one splashed all over the papers and the television". End of story.  But other things loom and lurk behind all this, a multitude of uneasy unpleasantness. To start with, can the god of perfect news stories really have gone completely unaided by human agency? Was this just a divine coincidence? Or is the boy from Number 10 too vulnerable? Consider the monstrous way Jack Straw's son was set up by an agent provocateur from the Mirror, flattering and urging him on to buy some cannabis for her. How much should the boy from Number 10 trust "friends" when the chance to make spectacular fun of the prime minister is right there, begging for it? It probably doesn't take Rohypnol or any other artificial means to encourage a boy over the edge on an end-of-exam spree. But why, according to one eye witness, was he found vomiting alone in Leicester Square? Where were these friends? And who tipped off the press? Whoever it was behaved disgracefully, whether it was a friend or - far more likely - the police, who are never sacked for taking backhanders for stories about celebs' minor infringements that would never otherwise see the light of day.  And then there is our old friend the press code of practice, fine words honoured in the breach every day of the week. Out Lord Wakeham duly popped yesterday, Fleet Street's noble figleaf, quick to assure the hacks that of course it was perfectly OK to pillory the boy in print - he was 16, out of school, underage and drunk. So much for the protection of minors, or for allowing a judge to decide whether naming a boy isn't too grave a punishment for such a minor crime. It is probably irrelevant. Some stories are just too stupendous to be held back by any code and Downing Street very wisely didn't even try. But that doesn't make it right or fair on someone who is still a child.  Then comes the awful spectre of what life must be like in Number 10 for any normal London boy, dragged off to the stately boredom of Chequers at the weekend. Alastair Campbell revealed yesterday that the prime minister had been up late working on his boxes, already worried that his son wasn't home by 1am. Cherie was away with the baby in Portugal. Campbell added the chilling reassurance that the Blairs are "strict disciplinarians" and you just hope against hope it's not true. But it makes you wonder if the boy is bursting with anger at restrictions unjustly imposed upon him by his parents' public careers. He was allowed no alcohol for his 16th birthday party - presumably because if anyone got drunk it would have hit the front pages instantly. Was getting drunk this week a resentful son's dream revenge on his father - the father of the nation? (Pyrrhic victory - it's even worse for Euan.) Any half-way successful parent knows the onus that success puts on their children: there is no protection. Add to that a new baby: what adolescent wants to be reminded that their parents still have a busy sex life (yuk), when they are just starting to get their own together?  As for parenthood, no prime minister (or any other big banana) could ever be much good at it. Yesterday's prime ministerial diary meant unveiling a police memorial and making a key speech to 6,000 black religious leaders in Brighton, hastily rewritten to include remarks about the travails of fatherhood (remarks whose diffident charm probably went down better with the religious than with his hungover son). Then he was off to do a whole gruelling television Question Time on his own with David Dimbleby, again talking loudly about fatherhood while not actually having time to do much of it. It is not his fault, no overwhelmingly important job is ever family-friendly. The super-famous give their children hell, however good they are, however hard they try. Forget privilege: son of so-and-so is the worst possible start in life, this side of a slum. Just consider the Hollywood "my mama/papa from hell" tales. Is it too unkind to raise the ghosts of Randolph Churchill or Mark Thatcher? Maybe the mega-ambitious shouldn't have children at all. Whatever the truth of this case, who would not feel sorry today for the young boy with a sore head inside Number 10?  For his father, woes tread upon each other's heels. Early-shift PA reporters were just pushing out a rather different story on the wires, before Blair booze-boy broke. Its breezy tone was a political scene-setter for the coming day: "Tony Blair was today hoping two high-profile public appearances will help him to seize the political initiative from the Conservatives and shrug off a turbulent month for the government. Aides hope today's appearances will see Mr Blair finally emerge..." It was not to be. Instead, in the dark watches of the night, he admitted in yesterday's speech to reaching for his copy of lugubrious old Longfellow, quoting: "For thine own purpose, thou hast sent, The strife and the discouragement!" Oh dear, the PM's chosen poem is a wail of wallowing despair. So out of kindness today at least we might resist the temptation to join the chorus of voices offering political lessons to be learned from all this. Poor man. Things can only get better.  