Blair Unbound<br />by Anthony Seldon with Peter Snowdon and Daniel Collings<br />(Simon &amp; Schuster) £25, pp704 He's back. Just when Tony Blair has disappeared, as if vaporised, from the domestic political stage, here is the reminder of how completely he once filled it. The second volume of Anthony Seldon's biography is unstinting in its detail of the Blair tenure in the years after the Twin Towers fell. This is an account in which no banana goes uneaten (Blair makes 'short work' of a piece of fruit while watching the first footage of 9/11), nor any night's sleep disturbed ('absolutely diabolical' turbulence on the way to Japan) without the scrupulous attention of Seldon and his hundreds of sources. It is also, as we are reminded often, a tale of love. Tony loves Cherie. As one friend remarks: 'They are as much in love, and their relationship is as fresh, as the day they met.' And that's despite the Bristol flats imbroglio, the 'stresses' on the marriage and Leo, aged four, waking his exhausted father by creeping into the parental bed. Tony also loves Gordon, which is much more curious. As someone says: 'Underpinning all the noise about Gordon is Tony's highly complicated love for him.' It seems little short of miraculous that this bond survived Blair's ordeal of being roughed up by a brace of Eds (Balls and Miliband) and yelled at by Brown: 'When are you going to F off and give me a date? I want your job now.' The Downing Street genre of love story, as full of romance as a feuding chimpanzee colony, could be termed Mills &amp; Baboon. If affection seems in short supply, then the style is oddly reminiscent of a bodice ripper. Partly that is down to the daunting task of marshalling such a wealth of information. Three hundred interviews, comprising well over a million transcribed words, suggest a formidable exercise in production line efficiency and packaging. In less skilful hands than Seldon's, this could have been Tescolit. Blair's fondness for banal dialogue does not help. 'God, it is awful, this war business,' he remarks at one point. None the less, the result is a fascinating overview, not least for its even-handedness. This is as fair a judgment on a Prime Minister as you are going to get, especially so soon after his departure. Seldon, unlike his subject, has no wish to pre-empt or dictate history. His mission is to record events, not to assess how they will come to be seen. Inevitably, much familiar ground gets retrodden, but Seldon has also uncovered good stories. Even allowing for the axe-grinders settling old scores, there is convincing new material, especially on the Blair/Brown feud. In one set of meetings, convened to smooth out feuds, the Eds 'began to be astonishingly rude to the Prime Minister'. Miliband, once the 'white hope' of No 10, began to be written off, according to one source, as 'irretrievably lost to the forces of darkness and anti-reform'. In the face of such quasi-satanic opposition from his foes, Blair complained: 'I feel like an abused and bullied wife.' This culture of institutional thuggery at the heart of government casts, the reader might think, a whole new light on Blair's anti-yob crusade. The 'Respect' agenda, far from being a device for criminalising Britain's youth, might simply have been a battered PM's coded cry for help. The highlights of Seldon's book are often the cameo parts. Robin Cook, told to vacate the Foreign Office, sits with his head in hands and a brandy at his side, repeating to himself: 'What shall I do? What shall I do? Tony has sacked me.' Jack Straw goes 'quite white' at the first suggestions by British diplomats that America was ready to go to war on Iraq. Tony hosts a 'girls' night' in the flat at No 10, during which Tessa Jowell and Margaret McDonagh deplore his pretence not to know how to work the dishwasher. 'More seriously, they chided him over Lebanon.' Often, the Whitehall-speak of Seldon's sources, coupled with the strangeness of Westminster life, blurs the trivial and the world-changing: a Gleneagles banquet menu (lamb, aubergine caviar and parmesan polenta) seems hardly less dramatic than the evidence from Abu Ghraib. British reaction to the images of torture should not, Blair warns, 'go over the top'. Strip away the meticulous detail and this biography has two subjects: Blair and Brown. Their long and almost unrelenting battle for primacy is played out along the lines of a Tom and Jerry cartoon. Brown glowers, rages, sulks, plots and devises every scheme imaginable to hasten the end of Blair, an adversary who frequently seems cornered and defeated but who bounces rubberishly back from each new blow. Neither character quite transcends stereotype. There is little evidence of the 'love' that binds them and even less of the more affable face of Brown. Yet Blair seems far from the hero of a story that lays out all the flawed thinking that led to the Iraq catastrophe. Having backed to the hilt a disastrous conflict, he never pushed George W Bush hard enough on postwar planning. The notion that a better strategy would have guaranteed a good ending is a fantasy indulged in by the war's supporters. Even so, there was a possibility, never taken, of mitigating some of the grimmest consequences. If Blair felt pain or remorse over Iraq, there is little sign of it, beyond the sub-Shakespearean soliloquy in which he declares himself ready to 'meet his maker', at a time when many British service personnel, not to mention Iraqi citizens, were meeting theirs. As the cares of Downing Street finally bear down on him, he cries: 'Am I ever going to be free of all this stuff?' Now he is. This account of the Blair era, so soon after its end, is likely to be the fullest for many years. It is a solid foundation stone for history. Even so, it does not quite answer the question: who is Tony Blair? No one could have cast a wider net than Seldon and yet his subject, elusive as ever, somehow slithers through its mesh.