In a Paris courtroom, art has gone on trial. Novelist Michel Houellebecq, who stands accused by Muslim groups of inciting racial hatred, is defending his right to call Islam a 'stupid' religion. The rowdy hearing has so far been disrupted by invasions of free-speech protesters and far-Right activists. The intellectual and political classes are divided. It is all very French.  Technically, M. Houellebecq's own work is not in the frame, since the incendiary remarks attributed to him were part of an interview in the literary magazine, Lire. However, contempt for monotheistic religions in general, and Islam in particular, is a spinal theme of his new novel,  Platform, which has just entered the British bestseller lists.   The Paris mosque is arguing that 'freedom of expression stops at the point at which it does damage'. If that view prevails, M. Houellebecq may be looking at a year in jail and his book, which deals with love, sex tourism and terror, could face the shredder. The broader danger is that no fiction, The Famous Five apart, may be safe from the censors' scissors.   Enter the directors of three of France's major publishers, warning of mounting suppression. 'Literature's calling is not to appease but to worry and offend,' they tell  Le Monde. 'Nothing human, or inhuman for that matter, is off limits to literature.'   This view, so robustly challenged by Ayatollah Khomeini in the case of the Salman Rushdie fatwa, is being eroded in France. Earlier this month, the publisher Gallimard bowed to legal threats and decided not to resupply bookshops with Rose Bonbon by Nicolas Jones-Gorlin, the story of a murderous paedophile. A similar novel by Louis Skorecki also faces a mauling from children's rights defenders.   Disgraceful, say the three publishing directors. Nabokov, Genet, Roth and Burroughs would have never made it to the bookstands if the Mary Whitehouse tendency had been allowed to thrive. True, but the directors are also being disingenuous. Censorship sells. Penguin's triumph in the Lady Chatterley prosecution shifted 200,000 copies in a day. Censorship glorifies. No one would otherwise be mentioning M. Jones-Gorlin in the same breath as Dostoevsky.   In English chattering circles, where Michel Houellebecq is already lionised, anyone lacking a copy of  Platform (ideally well-thumbed and in French) will be galloping to Waterstone's. M. Houellebecq, like Piat d'Or wine and golden delicious apples, is an exporter's dream. But is he any more palatable?   Atomised, his last novel, was quoted at a million scrubbed-pine dinner tables as the authority on everything from why we have children to the fragmented society. Unless it was just about sex. Platform, though received less rapturously, is admired for its analysis of globalisation and its prescience in forecasting 11 September. Unless it's just about Islam-bashing. And sex.   The British don't quite get M. Houellebecq. Is he a Camus for our times or the Peter Stringfellow of belles-lettres? There are signs, in publishers' minds, of a preference for the latter. The French paperback of  Atomised has a head-and-shoulders portrait of a greasy haired male smoker, while the British cover shows a woman wearing only knickers. Flammarion's Platform is bound in plain buttermilk card: Heinemann's version, imaginatively, shows a woman wearing only knickers.   Such packaging is a metaphor for vacuity. Britain has not much to add to the French debate on blasphemy and the polemical novel. Our cause clbre, The Satanic Verses, is so elderly that the rancour between Salman Rushdie and his media critics long ago eclipsed a dead ayatollah's wrath. In the realm of fiction and politics, the only story of last week was David Willetts claiming Bridget Jones was a Tory.   The bestseller lists, despite exceptions like Nick Hornby and Zadie Smith, reflect none of the broad overview of society provided, in North America, by DeLillo, Franzen and a swathe of women, including Jane Smiley, Carol Shields, Anne Tyler and Alison Lurie. For textbooks on how we live now, we are stuck with Trollope and Trainspotting, plus chick lit and some edgy crime fiction.   M. Houellebecq is keen to expose the supposed phoniness of the modern novelists, in particular, John Grisham and Frederick Forsyth, both more popular with browsers in French provincial bookshops than the offerings of the great controversialist. Neither M. Houellebecq, in his slating of Islam, nor the authors involved in the paedophile scandal have touched any national pulse.   What they have done, successfully, is to pick at society's scabs. The real scandal is not the offensiveness of modern fiction but its lack of controversy and bite. How weird, for example, that paedophilia, a subject that paralyses and obsesses British society, has received no particular fictional analysis since Lolita.   M. Houellebecq's stance on Islam is different. The repugnant views of a novelist pitched somewhere between a communist past and the politics of Pim Fortuyn may whip up trouble as well as outrage. Iqbal Sacranie, secretary general of the moderate Muslim Council of Great Britain, has been warning the Government of a rise in irrational hatred and fear. In that climate,  Platform, certain to sell widely here, may be seen by some as offensive, even incendiary.   Others will take the correct view that novelists are always entitled to their views, however shocking, and that suppression is the greater evil. There is a place for regulation in the arts; in TV programmes seen by children, for example. There is, occasionally, an argument for banning books. The withdrawal of Michael Barrymore's biography seemed reasonable, since he would have profited from events he described unsatisfactorily to an inquest. But the point about fiction is that it contains, by definition, no objective reality.   Censorship, insidious and arbitrary, implies that people who read novels are too stupid to make up their own minds. Should Goethe's work have been shredded on the grounds that reading about the travails of the young Werther drove impressionable citizens to suicide? Should Agatha Christie have been pulped lest old ladies slipped cyanide capsules in one another's Harveys Bristol Cream?   To deny the novelist absolute freedom of speech would be mad. Equally, it would be folly to imagine that liberty equals power. The prejudices aired in  Platform may be noisome, but they are unlikely to constitute any threat to public order. The Home Secretary's loose talk of Bradford rioters as 'maniacs' and of communities being 'swamped' by asylum-seekers will do more to offend those of other races and religions than anything produced by M. Houellebecq.   Even in France, the novelist has limited influence. In Britain, politics and fiction have never seemed so disconnected. Society's shifts, for good or bad, are rarely incubated in a Booker short list.   Once novels mapped society. Interpretations of  1984 and Brave New World  remain the Ikea of political thought, quickly assembled to furnish any empty space, from a Francis Fukuyama thesis on genetics to a commentator's anti-Bush tirade. Where are the new gurus? M. Houellebecq's critique of clashing of civilisations, however misguided and banal, is a reminder of how wide the gulf between literature and politics has become. For that, at least, he should be thanked.