You had to blink. Here was the Labour party giving the once-detested Peter Mandelson a standing ovation. Nor was it just his self-deprecatory jokes, his apology for the past and his declaration of love for the party. It was what he said about what he wanted to do – a recognisably social democratic but pro-wealth generation programme for building a new British economy. The Labour party roared its approval. The real importance of Labour's 2009 Brighton conference was the reconciliation between the party's new and old wings. It was never likely to be a launch pad to win a fourth electoral term. Falling membership, decimated representation in local government and decaying finances all spell the same message – even before the party confronts the issue of its dysfunctional leader. After 12 years in power, the accumulation of compromises and disappointed hopes is too much – let alone the economic bust that Gordon Brown promised would never happen. The country is determined on change and unless some dramatic event, cock-up or scandal blights the Conservatives, by next June David Cameron will be prime minister. What happened in Brighton, though, was more subtle and in the long term perhaps more significant. Labour arrived at a new settlement about what it stands for and wants to do with power – and it is right. The policy gap between the clever standard-bearer of Labour's left, Jon Cruddas, and New Labour's tribune, Peter Mandelson, is now surprisingly small. There will be some blood-letting after the defeat, but with differences this narrow there is no basis for all-out civil war. Labour with the right new leader (probably David Miliband) could get back on its feet quickly and become a contender for power very fast – challenging a Conservative government that has too quickly surrendered to the hysteria over the budget deficit and is set to make some seriously wrong judgments on both the economy and Europe. For politics in the 2010s is going to be very different from the politics of the last 30 years. The Tories won four consecutive elections after 1979 because the political and intellectual currents were so passionately pro-free market; communism and socialism were bankrupt ideologies that had failed in practice and in theory. The 1992 general election defeat was a watershed. It convinced Blair, Brown and Mandelson that whatever their new leader John Smith might think, there was no electoral majority for any social democratic intervention in the economy, however clever or well-designed. Markets and business must rule unequivocally. Labour had to shed any pretension to intervene, redistribute or overtly promote fairness, and could only govern as a quasi One Nation Conservative party, spending the dividends from economic growth not on tax cuts but improved public services, from which the middle class would benefit too.Thus New Labour. Although the party won a landslide in 1997, paradoxically it won as a beaten tradition. What little social democratic radicalism it possessed, like introducing the minimum wage, were commitments made by the revered but dead John Smith from which it could not escape. It would do small social democratic things – such as the public benefit test for charities or introducing SureStart – but its only big economic social democratic commitment was to lift public spending on health, education and science. Reform was for public services; not for the private sector. The embrace of a pro-business, pro-minimal regulation, pro-City of London agenda was total. Gordon Brown's speech at Mansion House in June 2007 and Ed Balls's address to the British bankers in October 2006 were paeans to finance, financial innovation, light touch regulation, an FSA committed to promoting City interests (City bankers had been allowed to design its terms of reference) and the efficiency of markets – only marginally outflanked by George Osborne and David Cameron. After all, it seemed that everything was working like clockwork. There was prosperity, an ongoing opinion poll lead, improving public services and moderate taxation. The electorate had no appetite for a return to social division and the strident certainties of Thatcherism. The Brownites walked on water, pretending to their party that they were the true custodians of socialism, deriding Blair, while being feted in the City.   Then came the credit crunch and near collapse of the British and western banking system. Friday's shocking US unemployment figures were a salutary reminder of how hard it will be for western economies to shake off the deadly legacy of a broken banking system and shattered business confidence. There is no easy prosperity for New Labour to piggyback upon, and no easy appeal to Thatcherite low taxes, light regulation and free markets as the solution. Simultaneously to manage recovery, rebalance the economy and restructure much of the private and public sector in the aftermath of a financial shock of this magnitude  requires complex, sophisticated and non-ideological responses. The quest is on for a set of ideas that can deal with the new realities. Politics promises to be a lot more like it was in the 1960s and '70s when parties regularly alternated office, trying to put together something that might work in the face of intractable problems, rather than holding power for three or four consecutive parliaments. Brown's speech was thus even more important than Mandelson's. On first listening, it was another Brown clunker – overlong, declaiming rather than arguing, avoiding awkward truths and policy reversals rather than confronting and explaining them. But even his critics acknowledged that, despite all that, it had an unexpected force. Brown, although he would never acknowledge it, had reversed the judgment he made on election night 1992. He publicly and enthusiastically returned to social democracy. He attacked free-market fundamentalism. He insisted that finance should be the servant of business and society rather than its master. Brown was now a social democratic regulator and social democratic builder of a new financial system – proposing the creation of an investment corporation. Alongside that he proposed social investment – a National Care Service – and the democratic overhaul and renewal of British democracy. He answered the question of what Labour stood for and what it wants to do with power. There are gaps – Labour has not thought hard about why public initiatives so frequently become self-defeating and oppressive, nor about how to marry state and business more effectively. But the party is on the right track, and will not disintegrate when it loses. There is nothing serious to argue about. Last week may not have stopped a Tory victory, but it made it more likely that in the middle years of the next parliament, Labour will genuinely be challenging for power again. Brown, for all his painful limitations, is keeping Labour together and making it a real contender in 2014 or 2015. It might have been the best that any Labour leader could have done.