It was the summer of 1984. The terraced house in Cwm, home of a striking miner's family, was clean but modest; the cheapest furnishings. There was clearly no money coming in, but the defiance was undimmed. 'I'd rather eat grass than scab,' declared the young Welsh miner. Later that evening, we filed our film for Newsnight and headed gratefully back to London, away from the smell of rancour, poverty and despair. Many months later, Britain's bitterest industrial dispute was to end with the National Union of Mineworkers' leader Arthur Scargill walking with his men back to work, exactly 20 years ago this week. I sometimes wonder how that young miner came to terms with it all and what he's doing now. Nothing had been gained. The pits-closure programme against which the miners had been striking went forward as planned; 220,000 mining jobs were eventually to disappear. British Coal, as it became, was privatised.  Today, there are 7,000 miners working in seven pits, and if one in two of the old mining jobs has been replaced, there are still tens of thousands of men in their forties and fifties clustered in the former pit villages receiving incapacity benefit. The scars still run deep.   Scargill claims vindication; he was fighting for communities and jobs and they have gone even more quickly than he predicted. But the greater truth is that the miners' strike closed an epoch. It defined the end of the coal-based industrial economy and with it the core political philosophy of the left - that parliamentary socialists allied with the trade union battalions would confront and potentially transform capitalism through solidarity and unity.  Never achieved in the 1920s and 30s, it was not going to be attained in the changing landscape of the 1980s; the miners couldn't stay united and coal, along with manufacturing industry generally, was declining in economic importance.  It would take Scargill's epic defeat to demonstrate that truth, posing a question that too many on the left still don't confront today. If the labour movement's leadership had understood the times better, could it have redefined the left's project more cleverly and kept alive in contemporary guise some of the protections, institutions and solidarities of working-class life?  That was certainly Neil Kinnock's ambition, even if too few saw it at the time. Today's prosperity is often ascribed to the flexible labour markets that the Thatcher government entrenched after Scargill's defeat, but that's too simple, even if some labour-market flexibilities are an economic advantage. Globalisation, the rise of the knowledge economy and the extraordinary boom in house prices have all contributed to Britain's most sustained period of economic growth since the 19th century.  If the left had read the runes better, there might have been a stronger social-democratic prospectus than that available today, together with some coalition of social forces better able to back it. Leading your best men into a rout for no tangible gain was an act of supreme stupidity.  Reporting the strike for Newsnight was a watershed in my thinking. On the coaches with Yorkshire's flying pickets as they tried to shame the working Nottinghamshire miners into downing tools was, at once, enlightening and depressing; the rhetoric of working-class solidarity crumbled before your eyes.  Despite the jolliness and determination of the women at the tureens in front of the cameras, a soup kitchen is not where anyone wants to spend too much time. One abiding memory is the sheer dullness of day-to-day life in a long strike, along with the grinding poverty. You avoid this if you can.  The Thatcher government was well prepared. For three years, coal stocks had been quietly accumulated. Nottinghamshire's coal production, along with foreign imports, distributed through the non-striking rail network, meant the attrition of coal reserves at power stations was more than manageable.  The police were well organised and able to resist the flying pickets, so coal reserves could quickly move as needed to any power-generation problem areas. But for all that, Thatcher's political trump card was that Scargill so badly misread the politics of legitimacy. He wanted to rely on working-class solidarity rather than a ballot to legitimise the strike, fearful that some of the NUM's regions would not support Yorkshire, whose miners had held a ballot. Some of   them wouldn't, but by 1984, invocations of solidarity to support strikes weren't good enough - you needed votes. Without them, the NUM could never enlist the support of other unions or even keep itself united.  Twenty, even 10 years earlier, Scargill might have got away with it, but by the mid 1980s, the forces of individualisation were undermining the unity-led values of working-class Britain. Nottingham miners, dockers and rail workers, even had they been so disposed, were not prepared to lend support to a strike not legitimised by a ballot.  After the defeat, a major source of union power was irretrievably weakened and a justification for confrontational unionism was lost forever. The miners' strike also proved that the use of law in industrial relations and the regulation of union affairs in the public interest was amply justified. Both Wilson and Heath had attempted to reform trade union law but had been beaten back. With the miners defeated, Thatcher's reforms of the labour market could proceed apace and New Labour has not been minded to revoke them.  Without the evisceration of the Scargillite tendency, the Labour party would not have been able to shed itself of the old left project which, more than anything else, laid the ground for the two landslide victories of 1997 and 2001.  All that is for the good, as is the improvement in Britain's economic fortunes. Burning less coal has meant less carbon entering the atmosphere, another plus. The problem is that New Labour has shed the old without finding a new political compass, unhelped by a trade union establishment of whom far too many hanker for the exploded certainties once championed by Scargill. Most institutions suffering the reverse experienced by the miners would rethink themselves from first foundations. This the trade union movement has refused to do.  The result is that workforces have less voice than they should. More fundamentally, a key social institution that promotes the values of solidarity and fairness, and which anchors progressive politics, is too weak.  Looking back after 20 years, it is clearer that the defeat of Scargill was vital for the economy, the labour market, the environment, the public interest and progressive politics. But that didn't and shouldn't mean that capitalism should remain unchallenged, that working-class institutions should wither on the vine and that social democracy should be neutered.  Twenty years on, it is time for an honest assessment of what happened and some looking forward rather than back.