Of those who attend a remembrance service today or wear a poppy or observe next week's silence, there can hardly be any who lived through the horrors of the First World War. Time is unforgiving; human beings only mortal. Another 10 years and there will be no one from that era. As the direct connections wither, the poppy's symbolism shifts; the living are free to endow it with the symbolic meaning they think fit, rather than the one in which it was rooted. After last week's American elections, left and right alike are keenly aware of the importance of national symbols and 'good' truths held in common, like the importance of patriotism, family and hard work. Republicans have made them their own, marginalising the Democrats so that, as President Clinton has said, they were made out to be two-dimensional aliens, the key reason they lost.  The British right has the same tempting opportunity to appropriate national symbols like the poppy as belonging to conservatives above all, especially as they relate to war, aggression and death, of which the left, with its pacifist and humanitarian instincts, is necessarily suspicious.  The danger is ever-present, both for the left and the country. The bitterness in the US is not only about the enormous distrust of the intentions of the right and reciprocal scorn for the left. It is also that the Republicans, by co-opting the symbols and icons of national solidarity as their own, make the explicit charge that not to be a Republican is to be un-American and foreign. Democrats, as much a part of their country as Republicans, are characterised as strangers, a divisiveness that takes political exchange to new levels of emotional violence.  Which is why the left in Britain must be vigilant that it never allows itself to find itself in the same position. Defence Secretary Geoff Hoon was only slightly over the top in his lampooned eagerness to wear a poppy as soon as he could this year. He was very New Labour in his understanding that the symbol, especially during the Iraq war, cannot be allowed for a nanosecond to become appropriated by the right.  One of the cultural underpinnings of Mrs Thatcher's political ascendancy was created when Michael Foot as leader of the opposition, attended the Cenotaph on remembrance day wearing what some commentators described as a donkey jacket. This was seized on by the right as a sign of Labour's disrespect for those who died to secure today's freedoms.  Foot and the Labour party never shook off the charge, which even clung to Neil Kinnock. It is fashionable in many parts of the left to deride New Labour for its eagerness to placate tabloid jingoism, but its conviction that it should never again lay itself open to the charge of being unpatriotic or of not believing in nation is absolutely right.  When I look back at the 1980s, what enrages me as much as anything was that the Conservatives acted as if they and they alone were true to the ideas of Britain and Britishness, setting out to characterise non-conservatives as, by definition, un-British. We were treated as aliens.  But to understand that, the left has an obligation to itself and the country to make sure that it owns our national symbols as much as the right. That does not mean that it has to be supine about what those symbols mean. Poppies, modelled in a stroke of genius on the flowers that grew in the trenches and in the mud beside by the dead, carried enormous emotional significance for a generation transfixed by the catastrophe of the slaughter.  Every family had been touched by the war; a great, great many had lost a son or father without ever having the opportunity to grieve at a funeral. For them, 11 November was a moment when they could collectively share grief that was raw and anchored in the agony of loss; in the years after the First World War, the country actually stopped, still awestruck at the scale of the suffering. It was a national moment of catharsis.  That cannot happen now. As a result, the fortnight of remembrance is at a fork in the road. The British Legion needs to maximise poppy sales if it is to sustain its vital work supporting British war veterans. For that, it has to mobilise the already dwindling ranks of volunteers to sell poppies - and for the British public to want to buy and wear them in millions. It needs to bring new emotions to a now remote event. The question is how to achieve that.  The honourable route is to use this time to remind us that the sacrifice of those who died could not be more complete or tragic - and it is right that we find a collective moment to honour them and grieve. Nations are built, in part, on the blood of their citizens. We remember the 20,000 Allied soldiers who died in the first day of the Somme, but we should also remember those now dying in Iraq. We belong to the same national community with a shared history and shared future.  The dishonourable route, always lurking just beneath the surface, is to remember that our war dead were killed by Germans. We must never forget war, but we must never allow Germany to forget, either, and never drop our guard about its potential to do it again. Last May's European elections, where 20 per cent of most English regions voted for Ukip, rising to an amazing 32.6 per cent in the East Midlands, was a wake-up call - if one were needed - about how noxious journalism, coupled with some native jingoism, has created a toxic anti-foreigner brew.  It was at work again last week during the Queen's state visit to Germany. Michael Portillo in the  Sunday Times and John Hughes-Wilson in the  Daily Express both wrote that, far from apologising to, or even sympathising with, Germans over the bombing of Dresden (or see it as a war crime), Britain should never allow Germany to forget its role in two world wars.  Portillo strained to argue that his desire to keep the wound open was not anti-German but rather anti-war, but the distinction doesn't hold. If a particular country is made a permanent symbol of war for all time, it is forever tarnished. Its rehabilitation is impossible; it becomes a leper among nations. The note the Queen struck - that the two countries have to look forward in reconciliation and deepened partnership around shared values while never forgetting the sufferings of war - makes more sense.  That being so, we should not let remembrance and the symbolism of the poppy be sentimentalised around a crude Euroscepticism. Nor should they be a vehicle for an unshifting mistrust and hostility to Germany as the 20th-century's warmaker, whose villainy must forever be remembered.  Rather, this is a moment for honouring the risks and sacrifices of those who fight our wars as a trigger for trying to make sure we fight as little as possible. For our generation, remembrance should not be about Germany but about Iraq, too, surely worth some silent reflection this Thursday.