Love or hate it, there is no denying the sporting, cultural and even economic importance of football. Yet it is a British fiasco, plagued by self-defeating greed and pockmarked with escalating corruption. It is an exemplar of Britain at its worst, an all-too-familiar story of how cowboy capitalism, personal vanity, timid government, an unobserved rulebook, uninquisitive journalism and ineffectual leadership is bringing a great sport to its knees. The heart of the problem is the temptation of personal riches beyond the dreams of avarice in a world with very weak rules, policed by the very same people who stand to benefit from their weak imposition. Thus, with the arrival of television money, comes the demi-monde of powerful agents, bungs, inflation of players' salaries, a frenzied transfer market and entrenchment of power and money in a few top clubs. Thus, the silting-up of the processes by which our own talent might be developed; nearly half the players registered in the Premier League are not British.  Everybody knows of the shenanigans, but by indulging them, the signal is sent out that there is no penalty for amoral behaviour. If we can, we all should do the same. For what football demonstrates more eloquently than any economic tract is how feeble are the self-regulating tendencies of capitalist markets, of how easy it is for industries to succumb to perverse and self-destructive incentives and of the necessity for external intervention by way of regulation and rules to make good those endemic shortcomings. That football should have arrived at its current pass is testimony to British incapacities. We don't just lack understanding of why things end up as they do - we lack the leaders with the inspiration and organisational skill to put things right.  You may consider some of this over the top, but even allowing for author Tom Bower's predilections for unrelievedly seeing the worst of human nature, his recent book on football,  Broken Dreams, is a  tour de force. The cumulative impact of the evidence he assembles is devastating. There is Harry Red- knapp, the then manager of West Ham, buying 144 players in his seven-year tenure in office, some of whom hardly made an appearance on the pitch.  There is George Graham's famous 'unsolicited gift' of £425,000 in used £50 notes from agent Rune Hauge for the transfer of Pal Lydersen, a transaction that would cost Graham his job as Arsenal manager and Hauge a two-year disqualification.  It was the same Hauge who had organised one of Nottingham Forest manager Brian Clough's more infamous bungs. But, nine years later, Leeds United were to pay £1.7 million in agents' fees for the £16 million purchase of Rio Ferdinand, including to the same Rune Hauge, a payment, we learnt in the subsequent investigation, that was authorised in line with club policy.  Terry Venables's astonishing career, including his disqualification on 19 counts as a company director until 2005 after the DTI's investigation into his private company, Edennote, is detailed with grisly fascination, as is the rise to power of Ken Bates, chairman of Chelsea, a story in which tax havens and a partner, Stanley Tollman, accused in New York last year of 33 charges of fraud and tax evasion, figure highly. So it goes on. And throughout it all, the Football Association is revealed as a toothless onlooker, with almost every club in the premiership with its particular unpleasant skeleton in the cupboard,  It was only 12 years ago that the then First Division was receiving £1.8 million a year for selling exclusive TV rights; in 2001, Sky paid £1.3 billion over three years. Moreover, the revenue is distributed not equally, as it is in American football, but according to a formula weighted by appearances on TV. Thus, the more you win, the more you earn from TV and clubs like Arsenal and Manchester United get on a self-reinforcing cycle of success.  Another product of the sudden influx of money - that players have become important capital assets in their own right - and the incentive structure for self-defeating behaviour is complete. An important source of additional income has come from trading players. If, as Redknapp acknowledged, a manager outside the top knows that his life expectancy in the job is going to be shortlived because the chance of winning in an environment skewed towards entrenching the already powerful is small, then the incentive is to trade players enthusiastically in the elusive hope of building a squad that will at least allow avoidance of relegation - and make some profits in the process.  If impossible debts are incurred and a few hands are greased along the way by players' agents, with money getting lost in tax havens and private companies, so be it. Grab what you can while you can, a view indulgently and variously endorsed by former Sports Minister Tony Banks and television commentator Gary Lineker.  The supposed regulator is the FA, but it has been taken over by the Premier League, now occupying the same offices and with its key committees run by Premier League chairmen. So the FA's compliance unit is answerable to the same people it is policing, a truly hopeless structure.  Whether it's Premier League chairmen's niggardliness over releasing players for England games, the veto on considering a more equitable distribution of TV revenues or a reluctance to insist that accounts and payments to agents are transparent, the decisions go back to the root cause. The system is run by the rich for the rich, the regulator is captured and in the jungle every man is out for himself.  Hopes that clubs becoming publicly quoted companies would change things have also been dashed. British company law and standards of corporate governance are so low that football's abuses are comfortably accommodated. Indeed, a recent attempt to improve our standards of corporate governance through the Higgs committee's recommendations is being as stoutly resisted by the CBI as the Premier League resists any form of independent regulation. The fat cats fight hard to protect their cream.  It does not matter that England lost 3-1 to Australia; it's when Sky lowers its fee for television rights, as it surely will next year, that a number of indebted and badly run Premier League clubs will go bankrupt - and the sport as a competitive spectacle will be further damaged and left even more firmly in the hands of the leading clubs. The only way out is strong, independent regulation coupled with some enlightened leadership in the sport. But for that, you can whistle in the wind.    Broken Dreams by Tom Bower, Simon and Schuster, £17.99