British agriculture is enduring its toughest spell in living memory. Farm incomes have fallen by three-fifths since the mid 1990s and things will get worse. European enlargement, billed for 2004, means that British farmers will have to compete with the low-cost bread- basket of Europe. Eastern Europe's arrival spells the inevitable reform of the Common Agricultural Policy, further lowering prices. The pressure to open up Europe's agricultural markets to producers worldwide is unrelenting. Add on the emergence of the supermarket chains with their enormous buying power, squeezing margins still more, and British farmers can be forgiven for feeling something close to despair. What is required is a root-and-branch rethink of how we use our land. The truth is there is no future for the farmer lifestyle celebrated in The Archers. The tragedy for rural Britain is that just when it needs the nation to engage with its acute crisis it has chosen to link its fortunes with the debate over fox-hunting,   so distancing itself from the allies it needs and betraying in the process a proclivity for a conservatism of approach that is the least helpful way forward. The hope that with more hand-outs, the request at the core of next Sunday's Liberty and Livelihood march, all can be the same is self-delusion. Change is unavoidable.  The scale of the problem is breathtaking. The average net income for British farms is £5,000, even lower for hill and sheep farms, well below the yearly income on a minimum wage job. Moreover, the fall is gathering pace. The combination of the high pound against the euro, a worldwide glut of agricultural production and a CAP that cannot offer any relief because it is already too expensive has meant that most agricultural product prices are falling in real terms , even as input prices, notably fuel and fertilisers, rise in price. If parts of the country are big winners from globalisation, agriculture is certainly a loser.  Farming is in recession because it is in the grip of severe price deflation. Farming may even be the precursor of the same phenomenon stretching into other areas of the economy; manufacturing confronts a similar pattern of overproduction and falling prices, and there is emerging overcapacity worldwide in industries as disparate as airlines and financial services. Consumer prices have fallen for the last four years in Japan, and factory gate prices are falling in both   the US and the EU. Some economists are predicting that both economies will follow Japan into a period of deflationary falling consumer prices, a grim prognosis for output and employment.  Farmers like to portray themselves as the victims of a vendetta by heartless urban dwellers who do not understand rural life. The truth is that agriculture is an industry like any other, at the receiving end of similar forces. Indeed, compared to manufacturing, farming production and employment are holding up comparatively well - and enjoy an annual £3 billion subsidy on top.  That does not mean the scale of the human tragedy is any less; the collapse of his father's farm described by Richard Benson in today's Review is profoundly affecting. It is not just the loss of a business and a job; it is the loss of a way of life. If the land falls idle, then part of our collective birthright also changes. Yet the same was said of the loss of mines, shipyards and steel mills. They had to go because the sums did not add up, a process made worse by British economic policy.  The issue is twofold. Could the force of the crisis be softened by a different institutional structure and policy mix? And could rural Britain be offered better support as it transforms its economic base? The answer to both is surely yes.  Farming suffers from two chronic weaknesses; it is poorly organised before the bargaining power of agri-business   and it lacks access to cheap, long- term credit from the type of specialist farming banks that exist in mainland Europe. It needs to organise itself in powerful co-operatives that capture more of the food-processing business locally and insist on higher prices from supermarkets. If the co-operatives are to have sufficient financial muscle, then they, in turn, need to be able to get supportive finance from a specialist farming bank.  If Britain were to join the euro at the kind of exchange rate advocated by manufacturers - some 15 per cent below the current rate - the combination of these measures alone could boost farm incomes up to a quarter. Not massive; but enough to have kept Richard Benson's father in business. Equally, the infrastructure of social support has been weakened by transport deregulation eliminating many rural bus services and the right-to-buy legislation, so that there is a chronic shortage of affordable housing in most rural areas, an issue highlighted by our Focus today. Nor does the land issue stop there. Successive government's willingness to allow inheritance tax to become a token tax has meant that land ownership has become highly concentrated. In the 1940s and   1950s, tenant farmers had a chance of buying land as large estates sold off tracts to pay estate duty. No such chance exists today with most big landowners holding their land in offshore trusts. As a result, there is a cohort of ageing tenant farmers unable to buy their farms, diminishing even further their access to credit because they have no collateral.  It is not just official commissions like this year's Curry inquiry which believe the rural economy has to diversify. This view is shared by almost every independent analyst. Organic farming, eco-tourism, building attractions such as Cornwall's Eden Project - there are host of ideas to hand. But all require leadership and finance and that, in turn, requires the kind of institutional structure and fairer pattern of land ownership that we currently do not have.  The Countryside Alliance should be pressing for Britain to join the euro, and for enforced and increased inheritance tax, an end to right-to-buy legislation, support for specialist farming banks and powerful co-operatives, the reregulation of rural transport and a drive to diversify the rural economy around a recast CAP. Instead, it offers reheated euro-scepticism, self-pity and a call to protect fox-hunting. Those who live and work in rural Britain deserve much, much better. They are lions lead by scarlet-jacketed and braying donkeys.