They hunt in packs, don't take risks, and are obsessed with sex. All that counts are ratings. The controllers and schedulers of British television are under fire - even as they roll out their stock replies that creativity has never been higher, accusations of dumbing down never more inaccurate and public service broadcasting never more secure. Who is kidding whom?After a week in which ITV's outgoing director of programmes, David Liddiment, accused the BBC's director general, Greg Dyke, of having no conception of the BBC's obligations - to which of course the BBC replied with traditional outrage - one senior television executive put his hand up on Friday to declare that in one part the criticism is justified. Mark Thompson, the chief executive of Channel 4, used the Edinburgh Television Festival's MacTaggart Lecture to launch a mea culpa.Our television suffers from a creativity deficit, he acknowledged - and since he moved to his present job from being the BBC's director of programmes, that is an admission from the belly of the broadcasting establishment's beast. Too much is 'dull, mechanical and samey'. Too few risks are taken; too much commissioning is about assuaging vested interests, box-ticking and repeating formulae that have worked. Channel 4 and a newly-fashioned relationship with the independent sector is the solution, he argued, and is an essential part of any complete conception of public service broadcasting. The sting in the tail was that, in addition to its commitment to the BBC licence fee, the Government should offer Channel 4 support if the advertising recession gets worse, to protect what Thompson promised would be a new upsurge in its creativity.This was an implicit criticism of the BBC - any creativity deficit surely extends to them - but also a clever way of expressing a growing fear stretching across broadcasting that the advertising party is over. Rates have fallen some 15 to 20 per cent over the last year, and leading media analyst John Billett warns that a further round of tariff reductions is in the offing. Nor, he says, will advertisers come back as normal in the next economic upturn; television advertising is becoming a weak instrument for achieving companies' sales and marketing aims and they are turning to other means of promotion. Couple this structural shift with the relaunch of digital terrestrial TV in the autumn and the competition promised in the Communications Bill, and even the painful restructuring that Channel 4 is promising to regain profitability could be inadequate. For Granada and Carlton, losing audiences with dismal schedules and having made epic strategic mistakes over digital television, the financial implications are even more dire.Yet, as Thompson recognised, it is not as though this potential financial crisis comes after a golden period of British television, Channel 4 included. As the channels roll out their autumn schedules, with the usual drumbeat of boasting about new thresholds of innovation and originality, there is little doubt that their foot soldiers broadly agree with Thompson - at least judging from those I spoke to in Edinburgh.Take the unstoppable march of sex on television. The mainstream broadcasters want to pretend, first, that it is not primarily about masturbatory titillation but factual information and entertainment; second, that there are not that many truly 'adult' programmes; and, third, that there has not been a contagion effect whereby sex crowds out other programmes and sexualises much of what remains. This fools no one. The headlong sexualisation of British television is obvious to all and Thompson's channel has been leading the charge.One of the opening sessions at the festival on Saturday - 'Must have sex in the title' - unsatisfactorily wrestled with the issue as four male commissioning editors of sex programmes reflected on what were they were up to. All were in a bind. If they pretended their programmes aimed to be solely factual they were being disingenuous; if they tried being honest they sounded like pimps. The truth is that sex brings audiences, and adult sex brings higher audiences; that Channel 5 established itself with sex; that channels such as Bravo win quarter million audiences with programmes on Las Vegas porn queens; and that schedulers under financial and competitive pressure are going to give us more and more. This autumn Channel 4 will offer a history of pornography; Channel 5 a series on what turns us on; and the BBC a drama series on lesbian love (lesbian sex is a ratings winner).A more liberal approach to sex on mainstream television is overdue; that is not the issue. Nor is it in doubt that reality TV, of which we will also see more, wins audiences. What is at stake is what is foregone, and how other kinds of programmes - about social, business, cultural, foreign or political issues - are pushed to the margins of mainstream channels or into marginal channels like BBC4. The ecology of our broadcasting, and thus our culture, is steadily corroded. Yes to populism and sex - but they should remain part of a broader mix. Television is about enlarging our shared experience; that experience is in danger of becoming narrow and uncreative.It falls to the BBC, the only channel with the financial strength, constitutional obligation and reservoirs of creativity to provide leadership against this trend. Although Liddiment's attack on Dyke last week was weakened by ITV's self-inflicted wounds, he spoke for a growing consensus. The pressure on commercial broadcasters is already acute; survival demands they play safe - and even Thompson's brave words were qualified by the warning that his channel might need public support.At this, BBC executives tend to smile and shrug; we're damned if we're successful, they complain, damned if we're not. The BBC's responsibility is also survival - that means playing by the same rules as the rest in order to preserve public service broadcasting. If that was once right, it is no longer - and seriously misreads of what's afoot. The BBC can and must lead; its standards for success need to be greater than market share. Yet my impression after Edinburgh is this is not likely. Television - habitually self-regarding and inward-looking - has seriously lost its way.