Britain has never accepted that cities are at the heart of its economy, society and civilisation. Rather, they are something we put up with. The loved Britain is the idyllic country - Palladian mansions and parks for the rich; rose-covered cottages for the poor. Cities are sinks of decay, deindustrialisation, crime, poverty, congestion and blight. Yet to despair of our cities is to despair of our civilisation. The Italian Renaissance grew out of its vibrant cities; the flowering of Victorian industrialisation was centred on the great civic culture that tried to roll back squalor and celebrate urban life. If Britain is to capitalise on nine years of steady growth it will be when our cities, notably those outside London, start to reproduce the capital's economic and social vitality.  There are signs of life. Three years ago, seven English cities outside London - Birmingham, Manchester, Leeds, Newcastle, Bristol, Liverpool and Sheffield, and now joined by Nottingham - clubbed together to form the Core   Cities group. Their proposition is that vibrant cities are the solution to economic and social ills. They want a recasting of their financial and political relationship with London in order to revitalise themselves.  Last Friday, meeting in Manchester, they won important concessions from the Government - a recognition from Lord Falconer, Minister for Housing and Planning, of the legitimacy of their case and a promise from Stephen Byers, Secretary of State for Transport, Local Government and the Regions, that he would ease the incredibly centralised control of planning, borrowing and even revenue-raising that throttles regional cities.  The scale of what needs to be done is huge. Research from the universities of Manchester and Leeds and the LSE shows that the economic and social gap between the core cities and their regions with London and the South-East has steadily widened since 1993, in sharp contrast to what has been happening elsewhere in the European Union. The inequalities in opportunity and income that preoccupy Gordon Brown and which will surface in his Budget this week are systemically geographic.  Unless the core cities can begin genuinely to revitalise themselves, the Government's ambitions for reducing inequalities in poverty, health and education, along with closing the productivity gap, will remain stillborn.   London's growth is instructive. It is the city above any other in Europe that has benefited from globalisation. All its traditional strengths and infrastructure have been boosted by a process that has required little or no direction. Its airports have become major sources of competitive advantage, so that west London, close to Heathrow, has a booming cluster of knowledge- and information-technology-based companies feeding off Heathrow's linkages. Similarly, the City is a massive beneficiary of the globalisation of financial markets. London's universities and teaching hospitals are prospering from a wave of foreign students and patients.  Multinationals base themselves in London to capture these advantages and so reinforce them. A new, smart manufacturing sector is emerging to service the financial and professional services industries. It is a remarkable shopping centre. A burgeoning micro-service sector, ranging from hairdressing and restaurants to professional gardeners and party-organisers, is growing to meet the demands of affluent households and small businesses.  Yet the core of its growth is based on the knowledge industries around which these other industries feed. It is the quintessential, knowledge-based 'ideopolis', a twenty-first-century version of what we first saw in Italian Renaissance city states.  The core cities outside London are the poor relations - they witness all this but are unable to do much about it. Much of their growth has been lopsided, skewed towards retailing rather than the integrated growth from which London has benefited. The British now have 10 square feet of retail space per person, five times the European average; 31 per cent of Europe's retail space is in Britain. All our regional cities boast enormous shopping malls that have brought jobs and growth. But these alone are an insufficient basis for urban regeneration and, if based outside the city centre, they often actively hurt it.  This is not to decry shopping; as a father of two teenage daughters, I have come to understand that shopping is a major cultural and social pleasure. Our retailers are sophisticated and highly efficient, and the next wave of shopping development needs to be shaped so that it boosts urban life. Shop architecture and the planning of shopping districts and malls need to become fundamental to the way cities think of promoting their liveability and attractiveness.  But alone this is not enough. Our core regional cities all have the capacity to become 'ideopolises' in their own right. Unlike London, they will have to direct their efforts rather than expect it to happen spontaneously. Above   all, they have to capitalise on the new institutions that underpin contemporary growth. First, airports and the districts around them have to become growth poles in their own right, and key linkages to the outside world. The quality of their transport links to the city and region they serve is no less fundamental.  Second, there are the universities, neglected as sources of intellectual capital generation, growth and cultural strength alike. World-class universities are the other new growth poles, especially if their ideas are diffused into local businesses and civic society.  To do this requires much more local political direction, autonomy, planning and financial power than our cities currently possess. They are Europe's political and financial weaklings. But they are also where the bulk of the electorate live. If the Tory party ever got politically savvy, it has a vast agenda to pick up and run with, which would reconnect it to the urban vote.  New Labour shows signs of recognising the importance of revitalising our cities after its early disdain for the conclusions of Lord Roger's urban task force. It needs to get serious about the entire programme - from building high-density housing to delegating more political and financial power - not just in the interests of our cities, but of its own political base. Cities are at the core of our civilisation. Let's recognise it and act.