There's strapping, bustling Jo Frost, sense and sensibility poured into a sensible suit. Dozy dads turned round in 30 minutes flat. Weepy mums dusted down or braced up. Appalling kids tamed on her "naughty seat". She is Supernanny incarnate (with male public school fantasies loosely attached). So why do I keep dreaming about the next TV series after Jo? Let's call it Supergranny, with Supernumerary Grandpa in tow. Supernan and Gramps have been auditioning for the job in Barcelona these past days, minding a three-child shop (six, four and two) while Mum and Dad were away on an Italian job for five nights. See Supernan getting six and four ready for school and a 40-minute commuting trail across town. Watch less-than-super Grumps deal somewhat irresolutely with two's breakfast.  I should, perhaps, explain at this stage that Beatrice is pretty memorable as tiny two-year-olds go. Is it her great, dark Spanish eyes? Is it her habit of suddenly saying surprising things? ("Look, Grandpa, the sun is going down over the hill and the shadows are growing longer.") But, for the moment, it's only 7.15am and the sun has barely crawled out of bed yet.  Six and four are eating their cereal peaceably in the living room, one eye on CBeebies, the other flitting occasionally floorwards as Supernanny puts their socks on. Beatrice, meanwhile, has clambered on to the kitchen sideboard and is ransacking cupboards.  "Do you want Sugar Puffs or Coco Pops?" I say. She wants the Puffs. Clear instruction. So I pour them out into a blue plastic bowl. No!!! Not the blue bowl. The yellow bowl? No!!! The red bowl. This red bowl? No, the other red bowl!! And do you want milk or tea? Tea. No, not in the yellow cup, the red one (which seems oddly orange-coloured, but maybe the racket is turning us both colour-blind).  Let's go and see CBeebies with Leo and Georgie, then. We troop next door - at which point it becomes clear that six and four are eating Coco Pops. The Sugar Puffs are duly renounced. It is Pops or nothing, or a bit more of a commotion. In the blue bowl or the red bowl? The reds are still on their winning streak. Supernumerary Gramps departs on the school trek with six and four. The bedraggled Pops float, uneaten, rejected with impunity, in a puddle of milk when I return an hour-and-a-half later.  Now there are several things to say at this point. One is that Beatrice, like her brother, sister and our other five grandchildren, is a pearl beyond price. Family politics. Another is that, as I scrabble in assorted cupboards for bowls and Pops and Puffs, obeying ever-changing demands with a vacuous grin, I feel oddly like Michael, Tony and Charlie back home. Red bowls, blue bowls, yellow bowls, krispies, krunchies, munchies? Yes ma'am, just put your cross on this scrap of paper here. Politics as usual.  But the one thing you can't do is call for sensible Jo, for this is an entirely different sort of show. Supernanny, of course, is formula TV down to the last kick and yowl. Scene one: desperate parents plead for a miracle. Scene two: Ms Frost whispers in their ear. Scene three: happiness is just a thing called Jo, jetting off to her new rescue act, leaving her trained agents of tranquillity behind.   What happens next? There's always a brief line filed "a fortnight later" which claims that the miracle yet endures. And four months later? We're never told.  But Supergranny and Gramps aren't in such wham-bang business. Their most precious gift is time. They want to come back again and again, so Jo is mostly total Frost. Are we in loco parents, required to do the full naughty-seat routine when Beatrice demands a large plate of prawns and noodles, sucks the prawns, ditches the spag and demands another ice cream?  No: we're not parents. The parents are away. We've nil reason (Supergranny wisely says) for majoring on their absence. Why go around stirring up misery? Our role is to hold the ring, to make sure everyone has the cheeriest days possible and not to let things go to hell on a handcart (or the scooter Beatrice likes to whiz along the corridor on, prompting voluble Catalan gloom from the lady in the flat below).  Is that an easy role? By no means. Skills learned across two decades of editing the Guardian don't wash with Beatrice when you have to explain that her sister has swigged the last Actimel. There's no one-hand or other-hand here, nor any firm prescription: only persuasion and distraction or humiliation.  Supergranny is a lifetime show, not 30 minutes of brusque denouement. Supergran is being in charge, but not in charge, of leading but following, of lips bitten without demur, of diplomacy and self-abnegation. No, Endemol, you could never sell it - except as a 24-hour rolling stint on E4.  Back home for Paxo and Howard and other delights, we have two more (nine and seven) of the eight stay overnight, watch TV from 7am as not-normally-allowed, eat pancakes and demand treacle sandwiches on the Jamie Oliver memorial beat. "Not golden syrup?" says their bristling Supermum. "The sugar drives them wild." No, it's black treacle ... you know, organic, healthy? Diplomacy cuts both ways.  Beatrice, as it happens, is three this very morning. Goodbye to the terrible twos. Happy birthday, love. Time and wisdom and beautiful eyes are on your side. And meanwhile, just over there in CBeebies' corner, the leader of the Conservative party, wriggling on a naughty sofa, is putting thousands of refugees in his blue bowl for another Frost - and pushing them out to sea. Somehow, looking after kids feels like a nobler job too.