Should Sven go? And Chief Constable Westwood, for that matter? Not to mention Ian McCartney, Blair, Blunkett, Posh, Becks - and anyone else whose span in the headlines seems to have outstayed its welcome? This is post-failure time, scapegoat time, the morning after of the long knives: time to go out and make a meaningless sacrifice.Our illusion, most of the while, is that dumping the boss equals dramatic action. Are M&amp;S or Sainsbury's under the cosh? Then bang goes yesterday's whizz kid and everything's all right (or, more probably, not). But the sack, accompanied by sackloads of fivers, isn't the difficult option; it's an easy, often vacuous stop gap, a lever pulled for the sake of appearances. Farewell Piers Morgan, but does anyone think the Mirror's fortunes stand one jot transformed?Occasionally, to be sure, personnel shuffling grows inescapable. Kevin Keegan, and Glenn Hoddle after him, were tadpoles from a shallow, stagnant pool of talent who were never going to make fine frogs, and Sven at that moment of despond was a necessary recourse. He qualified for the big ones twice over and, left in place, he'll probably do it again. But that's not really the crux. The drums beat for him now from habit, impatience, boredom. Forget all the lousy passing, weary legs and absence of a class keeper. (Oh my Swift, Banks, Clemence and Shilton long ago!) Give us somebody else - anybody else - to get the juices flowing again.The impulse, on calmer examination, is exactly the reverse of what we say we want: that is, good management. Good managers know that mostly you have to build from the ground up, recruit solid people, construct a team and an ethos. Good managers know that most quick fixes fall apart just as quickly and that, in all probability, leaving the best man of his generation - Bobby Robson - in charge for 30 prudent years at a stretch would have brought England far more success than all the frenetic switchings. True business builders - like Stanley Kalms at Dixons or the good family Sieff at the old Marks - need the space to think and grow. True leaders aren't packed off if it begins to rain.But then, who cares about basic management theory when the headlines grow too lowering? We're in Chelsea land, Abramovich land, toyshop land, the land of the stinking rich where minds change as easily as fawning acolytes.What's the new wonder ingredient that, uncoincidentally, our government and loyal opposition both suddenly espouse? It's a return to grass roots and local option, an empowering of the consumer-citizen in his or her community, it's choice and connections. Get the suits of Whitehall out of the way. Boot the central bureaucrats. Let doctors and nurses and teachers, just doing their thing, save the day.That's one theory of course; actually the theory that ruled public life through the centuries before there was a national health service or anything you could call a national educational system. But it also shreds now at the first hard challenge.What is the democratic point of local police authorities if their views - close-up, informed, on the ground, community-based - doesn't count at a crunch? Why should David Blunkett know best and, if he does, why do his Health and Education mates sing from an utterly different hymn book? I've read the Bichard report and, if I were some omnipotent home secretary, might well want to hang David Westwood's scalp on my belt pour encourager dozy police forces everywhere. But that's not the point. The point is that the whole tide of government theory is flowing in an exactly contrary direction."Oh, but there are children's lives at stake here," say his supporters. And in the schools and hospitals too, sunshine: you can't pick and choose. Kicking out Westwood won't solve the real story floating at the back of all this - the chronic under-investment in police computer systems and the even more chronic lack of high-level staff to run the systems we have managed to install. (Simply, police-pay rigidities mean that they can't pay the market rate for the skills they most need).Kicking out Westwood, jawboning and litigating over the heads of those who know him best, is just another desultory blow to local democracy, local autonomy, local living. If this particular chief constable has learned all the lessons and is as determined as he claims to put things right, then give him that high-profile chance.Which brings us straight back, of course, to one team facing relegation from the premier league: New Labour, supposedly plotting its last reshuffle of the second term. Whose card is marked for the chop? Why, small, round, squeaky Ian McCartney. Somebody has to pay for June's election debacle, and it's the party chairman.But sooner or later you have to hoot with derision. Was Mr McCartney any less small, round and television-unfriendly when the prime minister solemnly appointed him 14 months ago? Does anyone truly suppose that the Euro-vote was a vote against squeaky Scotsmen? The difficult truth, when you look at it, is that this government of supposed competence and managerial talent has shuffled more twitchily, mindlessly and redundantly than most. It has sacked first and thought later. It has set a lousy, churning, aimless example. And mangling McCartney would put the lid on all that.Does Tony Blair ever wonder why the one pillar of the team which hasn't changed - Gordie next door - is also the most successful? Because of time and experience and long-term toil. Because every shoot-out has its penalties, Sven.