John Major started it with his potty "family values" crusade. Thou shalt not fall into bed with the wrong woman and remain a member of my blokeish government. (Shurrup, Edwina!) But prime ministerial pottiness is ever with us. Who, doe-eyed and dripping sincerity, invited our trust - and made himself the ultimate repository of that virtue? Tony Blair. So who now lives or dies on the red line he created?Pause, though, for pottiness is a three-syllable word of some complexity. Major wasn't daft to go back to basics per se; he was crazy to let his moral musings turn into a kind of ministerial code of toe-sucking practice. The truth was then, is now and must indelibly remain that politicians are just ordinary men and women, people like us, people no better than we ought to be. Jawbone them about fornication to your heart's content, but don't make silly, rigid rules that will inevitably - in ordinary, lustful humanity - be broken. That's potty.And trust - after seven years of bitter examination - is just the same, a plastic plant plonked in a flowerpot from some Daily Mail Ideal Home exhibition. The modern Mail, remember, deals in absolutes. Absolute family harmony or perfidy? A Major-type choice. Complete trust in our leaders or another pile of overspun horse manure from Mendacity Inc? It's a phoney construction, but a hugely powerful one: and we've swallowed it hook, line and stinker.Of course politicians, for a while at least, revel in public trust. Leaders great or small always like the adoration of the led. But try injecting another dose of ordinary humanity into that argument.Trust is a relative, nuanced thing. You may or may not trust your neighbour to feed the cat while you're away. It depends on the neighbour. You may or may not tell the local police you're going on holiday. That depends on what happened last time you went to Majorca. Who trusts a boss in a pay negotiation who says he's run out of money on day two? Or a union leader who promises to pull down the pillars then settles behind the arras?Would I trust the present Archbishop of Canterbury to be strong, consistent and stalwart over gay bishops? I'd be a fool if I did. Or the Cantuar just past, peddling an autobiography, to stay mum about Charles and Camilla? Ditto. Or Andy Gilchrist to hang tough when the fires of fury burned too high? Ditto - or however they say that in Portuguese.Trust is a matter of individual judgment and experience. If you work in an office, look round and categorise the people at the next desks. (No: of course you've done that long since, the first of the necessary work skills learned, office politics.) So why on earth should trust in politicians or governments, in prime ministers themselves, come as a job lot of pretty packages? It's an utterly false dichotomy. It carves professional politics away from politics day-to-day and seeks to bathe it in an artificially kindly light.You may trust doctors, but not Harold Shipman. Academic publishers, but not Robert Maxwell. Presidents of the US, but not ... oh, forget it! Some of the time, out in the back garden smoking a surreptitious fag, you may not even trust yourself.The point - the critical point - about any blanket concept of trust is the way it creates a Daily Mail kind of world. They, those bigwigs over there, are the leaders, and we gave them our trust. We, us lot over here, have been lied to and traduced ever since, suckers, victims, neglected pawns. See: the construct assumes that we are fools, self-deluding, malleable idiots incapable of doing what we do naturally in everyday life - thinking, assessing, making our own choices.There's something convenient, in a fast-food sort of way, about that divide, of course. It means we never have to admit that we, personally, might have got an issue wrong. We were "lied to" over WMD, and so need never grow introspective about what we'd have done on the information then available. We marched and were spurned. Fine, but blamefests come too damn easy.Throughout Europe, eight days ago, politicians in power got a rare old roasting from electorates oozing distrust. Same here: we put our faith in Robert Kilroy-Silk, maybe because Jerry Springer wasn't standing. Last week in Brussels, Blair tried "his cynical ploy" of "making as much fuss about a number of red lines as possible" and "keeping very quiet about the other issues he wasn't going to win". How do I know that? Because the Mail's main European "analyst" told me before the essential bargaining had even started. Never let facts or contemporaneous reporting get in the way of received opinion.This isn't, you may be relieved to hear, yet another column arguing for or against Europe membership. Leave that for the relevant time. What it is, though, is a shivering apprehension of debates that matter conducted in gimcrack stereotypes to barely hidden agendas.The cry from core Labour now is still "Trust Tony" - with an anxious descant demanding to know whether Tony can ever regain such trust. Of course he can't. Such trust is a plastic plant in a plastic pot. It can't be summoned on demand or glued back together.But this trust is anyway a worthless commodity. Its manifest lack didn't wreck Lloyd George or SuperMac or the wizard called Wilson. Nobody gave it to Bill Clinton (though he was more poll popular when he left office than Ronald Reagan). Nobody in full sentience would dream of trusting Charlie Kennedy to tell the same story in Aberdeen and Penzance - or Michael Howard to explain why he sacked the head of the prison service. Too much ado about synthetic sincerity. Trust me, I'm not a politician.