Politics is one thing (says a disarmingly frank senior Tory of recent acquaintance) and life is rather another. Life isn't 10-year plans or defining choices or big sackings. It is what happens next, the theatre of the unexpected. It is slopping coffee all over your road map. It is Alan Milburn Mark Two, not Mark One. My Tory - another one who doesn't want to be prime minister - could, indeed, have been talking about reshuffle time, the moment when human hopes and fears come brutally together. But in fact, predictably enough, he was on again about Europe and the euro - and hoping that Tony Blair wouldn't run his pending referendums together into some pseudo-apocalyptic vote on whether we want to be in or out. Give the great British people an allegedly stark choice between pottering on and dramatic change, and the faint hearts will have it every time.  But there isn't any real starkness here, he says. That's only the phoney edge of political rhetoric. Vote no and something - something we hadn't thought of, something the pundits of doom had discounted - will turn up. See? Life's a ramble, not a route march. Lie back and think of England on a sunny summer day.  Or rather, Ireland and Albania on two successive summer days. Go from one to the other, like me, and wash the scent of Blair right out of your hair.  Here we are in Dublin, roaming the narrow lanes at the back of Grafton Street. Cafe society, in the universal uniform of tank tops and tight jeans, is sitting out, chattering. The cash swilling over the counters, of course, is the euro. Are the Irish happy with that? They'd have been happier, perhaps, if Gordon O'Brown had gone a bit easier on his five pillars of wisdom - and happier, too, if the old leprechaun of inflation wasn't beginning to jig around again. But let's not pile on the gloom.  Growth is still strong by most reasonable standards. Not many blame the Central Bank. And Dublin itself, for the returning visitor, is a revelation. It used, long ago, to be Liverpool continued by other means: great buildings, narrow terraces, decay and decrepitude leavened with jokes and music. Now it is Europe. You sit with Finns and French and - inevitably - Americans. The girl behind the cash desk is English. Her manager is Chinese. Ireland used to be a place to get away from. Today it's a place where the world wants to call, a place to linger and maybe to live.  And that has very little to do with politicians, some of them notably duff and tainted, almost all of them voted out of office after a single term. They're no better than they ought to be. The change, with its lightness of spirit, is in the people. They have seen an opportunity - the opportunity of a political space - and filled it with buzz and bustle. They've transformed their physical existence. They've put the quality into their own lives. The latte touch.  And so to Tirana, which used to be Europe's answer to Pyongyang, the capital of a bizarre communist midget state drifting in poverty-stricken isolation between Moscow and Beijing. Only two years ago, it was grey and grim, rotting rubbish piled high in the streets, the fetid stench of abject poverty. No wonder that Albanians - like the Irish of old - took to boats and the backs of lorries and tried to escape.  But now it, too, is suddenly part of Europe. Heatwave evening and all Tirana - seemingly all its 750,000 citizens - has taken to the streets. The young, in their kit, sit at the cafes and restaurants which line the streets. Kids run in the parks. Mum and dad do their stately promenade. This is the Mediterranean, part Greece, part Italy, wholly surrendering to the night.  Who do we thank? A sort-of politician can take a bow. Edi Rama is a 38-year-old art professor who came home to help when the Hoxha regime crumbled, and ran for mayor. He did the simple things. He filled some holes in some roads. He got the refuse collectors off their butts. He built a new cinema and cleaned up the parks. And - because of the art - he had Tirana painted. The greys have gone. The streets are a chaotic blaze of ochre and azure and crimson and brown. There are trees along the pavements. There is a stage on which people can perform.  Those people, again. They've been given the opportunity - and borders open, at last, for business - and they've taken it. Tirana, after decades of oblivion, is another happening place. Six months ago - only six months ago - the currency of local choice was the dollar. Forget that. Now, a spasm of fashion, every taxi driver and every cafe wants euros. I spent the last of my Irish stock in Albania.  Too euphoric by half? Of course. Progress is more than a coat of paint and a capuccino. The problems -   corruption, crime, sickness, education - are as frightening as any in the continent we share. But there is something precious here, and something which links umbilically with the Dublin experience. A feeling of hope and movement. A surge of energy. A belief that we - we, the people - can transform our own lives.  So my Tory who started the week was more right than he knew. Politics isn't life. The cabinet pack that Blair shuffled is next week's cold potatoes. No referendum is ever final. Dr John Reid might as well go to Wimbledon. And the euro, with Gordon doing his brooding bit? All Ireland is becoming a euro zone as it flows unstoppably back and forth across that porous frontier. Not a matter of what ministers ordain, just what ordinary people do. Meanwhile, in Albania, they've done it already, done what comes naturally.