The chances of Gordon Brown ever becoming prime minister have diminished, are diminishing - and will continue to diminish inexorably. A sad, sad song. It's always tough when a hugely talented professional sees his heart's desire slip away. But it is also - no ducking, weaving or glossing - Gordon's own fault: bad politics as well as bad vibrations. Take a few findings from the latest Telegraph/YouGov poll. Do you approve of the government's record to date? No, say 68%. What about issues like Europe and taxation? The Tories are in the lead. And economic competence, the rock of reputations prudently built? Just 32% have kept faith with Brown. And 31% (since you ask) would prefer to see Michael Howard on the Treasury bridge. There's something of the night for all concerned here.  Now polls, of course, can be shrugged away. The chancel-lor's spinners say he'll shrug for Britain today when he tells the Social Market Forum that his "prudent and cautious" spending plans are on course, needing no new taxes; that the dear old "fundamentals are sound"; that while our share prices are only 48% down, Germany's have tumbled a whopping 67%. But this, alas, is politics, not comparative economics. This is show-business. Listen, therefore, to the dismal tinkle of luck and applause running out.  He said there'd be no more boom and bust. That is not how it feels. He took an early pop at the pension funds. Now they're becoming a national crisis, staggering from pillar to post, demolishing ordinary dreams as they go. Just as the taxation tide turns, so last year's national insurance rises snap into place. Just as the cash for public services comes on stream, so the firemen stoke a different boiler. Just as congestion charges arrive, so the Central line goes awol. And then there is university funding.  Every problem that seemed so breezy when there was growth and confidence, in short, now comes glooming round to Gordon's door. Things could be more awful, naturally. That's always true. Yet lustre, once lost, is powerful hard to get shining again.  In a normal Westminster world, you'd know what would happen next. A threat to the chancellor would be a threat to the prime minister and continuing governance. It would thus be loyally batted away unless (like Margaret Thatcher and Nigel Lawson) ritual sacrifices were more the order of the day. A chancellor is there to be defended until it's time, in extremis, to ditch him. But Mr Brown and Mr Blair don't live in a "normal" world.  They are both big beasts. Almost a decade ago, they sat over lunch in Islington and made the Granita accord. I won't stand against you for Labour leader (and thus prospective PM) if you quit half-way through your second term and let me have a go. Was it ever quite as neat as that? The old Granita restaurant was a famously noisy, clattery place. Maybe Tony dropped his bread roll at the wrong moment? Maybe Gordon found a fly in his soup? Still ... the legend and the black looks live on.  What we've had for almost six years now isn't the traditional line of command, prime minister down to chancellor, but more a division of the Whitehall realm into two rival kingdoms. The leaders have their own camps and followers. They jockey, needle and probe. They are allies in public and snarlers or sniffers behind the arras. Like North and South Korea, they always need watching. And it's Granita time, time to move over. High noon.  But is Mr Blair going to pack his bags and, like Peter Foster, depart for distant parts? Of course not. That was always an illusion. A disastrous war in Iraq might carry him off - but, in harsh practicality if not morality, it's far more likely that Saddam will crumple and a string of Iraqi scientists thereafter bear witness to the horrors averted. There's no alternative to a continuing Tony. There are, however, plenty of reasons why a continuing Gordon may not be so fireproof. Who wants a magician who's lost his wand? Who wants a baleful, brooding problem when fresh starts are easier?  It is because the realm was divided, because the pieces were scrapped over and parcelled out, that Gordon Brown is suddenly so vulnerable. Traditionally, when a prime minister has a night of the long knives with his neighbour, it is the PM's own status and policies that also appear in the frame. Sacking has its costs. But here the equation is different. Because Brown manifestly runs his own five tests, his own prescriptions for the markets, his own private funding initiatives and target-setting squads, because they are his and not Blair's, so the policies and the man can be simultaneously removed without that damage: a liberation rather than an assassination.  Would there be crisis and flak when the moment came? Inescapably. But it would also set the prime minister free, on course to be his own man with his own chancellor for a third term. It would allow New Labour a new beginning. And to see the logic, you need only consider the alternative: no change, no joy, animosity as usual. Who can possibly settle for another six years of this? Who would want to?  There's the fault with Mr Brown. He shouldn't have believed his own publicity. He should have shifted himself, in triumph, to foreign secretary or deputy PM a year ago. He should have remained forever Mr Boom not Mr Bust. He should have known that, like Jim Callaghan, his time would come if he was loyal and efficient and on the team, not a king over the water. He should, simply, have been smarter.