There may, at last, be the beginning of wisdom. Our erstwhile "natural party of government" does not expect to win the next election (or, perhaps, the one after that). It's down there in the pits, snarling at the Liberal Democrats, trying to hang on to second place. Even today, through a winter of liverish complaint, it is still failing. But at least abandoning immediate hope is a start. Indeed, Iain Duncan Smith - enduring yet another TV re-relaunch with Frost yesterday - seemed to go out of his way to play Charlie Kennedy without the jokes. He talked only about "alternative" policies (to be formulated) and a "strong, clear sense of direction" (to be be discovered). His claim to credibility (pure Lib Demery) rested on the supposedly mighty achievements of Tory councils out there in the wide blue yonder, so many of them apparently that few more could be expected in May. The phrase "when I'm prime minister..." never crossed his dry, pursed lips.  A turning point. The Conservatives have spent almost six years pretending that Blair and New Labour are merely some brief aberration, a hiccup amid continuing hegemony. They picked William Hague because he was the obvious young pretender, the inheritor. Then they sucked their thumbs and picked Duncan Smith. Now "desperate Tory MPs" (according to the Daily Telegraph) are hunting round for some "men in grey suits" to give IDS the push. Darkness without much sight of dawn, and six wasted years.  There will doubtless be war in Iraq this year, but there will be no euro referendum. Tony Blair has his own problems. He's wasted his extra layers of popularity. But what does that mean for the Tories?  It means that, at last, they have to be serious. Ken Clarke was the only serious runner in 1997. No go: a no-no on Europe. The assumption, remember, was that somehow the Tories would be swiftly back in office, so couldn't be led by some Brussels-truckling bruiser. And 2001? The same delusion ruled in the end. Duncan Smith's main selling point (with the Telegraph, among others) was that he wasn't Ken.  Yet, with only a thin smear of hindsight, there never was going to be a referendum during Labour's first term. Gordon Brown had got his fix in. And the second term is merely a re-run in less propitious circumstances. Will a third term look any better? Not if the big majorities have begun to shrivel. Not if the Conservatives begin to look remotely electable again. Not if what we fondly remember as "real politics" is coming back.  Take a real politician. Kenneth Clarke, now well into his 60s, is never going to be prime minister. He won't be available in 2010. He isn't the man for the long haul. But he is still - just about - the man to rough up a government losing its confidence and way as fatigue starts to gnaw. He knows about running Treasuries and Home Offices and Health and Education. Been there, done that.  Nobody has to look at him, as they do at IDS, and wonder how he would cope. If the job is effective opposition, making up lost ground, bringing a few talented people distantly remembered back on to the front bench, then he remains the obvious choice. If they'd picked him for 2001, then Labour would already be breathing less easily - and 2005 or 2006 would look much more problematic.  But it's surely too late for any of that. Iain Duncan Smith isn't going to fall on his sword because Lord Black of Crossharbour comes calling. The "Hague rules" for electing a new leader are death to men in grey suits. The next election is lost and the only remaining question is: how badly? And that is where any sensible party, gradually recovering its scattered wits, would start to think hard.  The job next time is damage limitation. The essential task is seeing off the Liberal Democrats. (Not so easy if Charlie, rather bravely, turns out to have called Iraq right.) The true focus is on the future, on 2010. That may not be instant politics as we know them, a shift to some distant time frame. It may be not suit what remains of the Tory press - ludicrously hailing Bush for his billions in tax cuts and deficits.  The Conservatives won't get another new leader in midstream. They could, however, get a deputy leader, a leader in waiting for next time round. Say Oliver Letwin. They could actually start to develop policies which will have resonance during Labour's third term (when the money has gone in properly and public services are either better or worse). They could resolve their tangle over reduced taxation or increased provision with something a bit more solid than phrase-making.  They could, in short, look serious again by admitting what they seriously know in their hearts: that this is the longest haul, without quick fixes. That, compared with all the toil Neil Kinnock endured, they haven't even begun.