Sir Humphrey Appleby, lest you forget, was not some modern Whitehall creature. It's well over two decades since he first began stitching up the hapless Hacker on TV. And Hacker, in so far as he was anything to begin with, was probably a gimmick-prone, ideologically challenged Labour hack. (New Labour ahead of its time.) Other boots, other feet. But we do forget. The mood music of the Wilson and Callaghan 60s and 70s - usually with Barbara Castle leading the chorus - was all about a conniving civil service bent on burying socialism and any prospect of fundamental reform. Whitehall, in that time of failure and thwarted ambition, wasn't a superb service industry, the answer to every challenge. Whitehall was the problem, not the solution: the conservative enemy.  See what a difference a quarter of a century makes. Now it's streamlined Hackers like Stephen Byers who are the phantom menace; now it's steel-toothed hackerettes like Jo Moore who make Sir Humphrey cringe. The Appleby texts, in their serpentine evasiveness, may not have changed much. ("I was not accountable - but I was responsible," as Sir Richard Mottram told the public administration committee last week. "Events sometimes catch you out.") What has changed, though, is the supposed balance of power.  We are solemnly invited to rally behind an embattled mandarin class - even to pass a new act of parliament which bulwarks that class's sacred role. We are solemnly instructed to cherish neutrality as though it was the holy grail of parfit administration.  That may be necessary for the outcome of the stale tale which involves thousands of evil spin doctors waging war on the highest standards of public service. But it is also, historically and practically, the most terrible twaddle (or ****ing twaddle, as Mottram might say in one of his events-strewn moments).  Pause over the facts. Our government, at the last count, had employed a mere 80 or so special advisers roaming the corridors, serving ministers one-on-one. They are pitted against well over 3,000 top civil servants, who live "in fear" of their interventions and importunate demands. It doesn't sound much of a contest, does it? The numbers of outsiders involved are puny. The expertise they bring doesn't usually extend far beyond a certain knowingness in media relations.  What, then, is the fuss about - a fuss which reaches far beyond Ms Moore into draft legislation and the inquiry officially launched by the committee on standards in public life? There must be a crisis because there is so much fuss.  In any other walk of public life, I guess, a sceptical Hacker and Appleby would know exactly what to make of this debate - because they'd know they were being set up. Police chiefs complaining about neighbourhood security guards, headteachers complaining about classroom assistants, RMT drivers complaining about Aslef - they'd see the angles coming from bleak experience. They'd know, at least in part, what this protective racket portended.  Here, however, the racket-makers wear dark suits and darker looks. They belong not to a common or garden trade union, but to the grandly titled First Division Association. Their paid representatives come down from the mountain tops of probity to defend them. They assert the existence of threat, and feel no need to soil their hands with proving it. They can set the retiring cabinet secretary dancing to their tune, voicing his belated alarm. They can outmanoeuvre a prime minister by exposing his weakest link: fear of unpopularity in the polls. The 80 interlopers - the security patrollers and classroom assistants in this game - are to be corralled and limited by statute. The battle against marauders is swiftly won.  Oh, excellent Humphrey! A sordid dust-up in a cubbyhole called the Department of Transport press office and bigger issues go begging. Victory has seldom seemed so sweet. And yet there are much bigger issues. Why, for instance, should the first division 3,000 be spared the scrutiny which normally accompanies disappointment?   This is the age for kicking bureaucrats - in Brussels, in local government, in the health service. "Faceless" pen-pushers carry every can. Yet not, apparently, in Whitehall. When grave men are fielded to observe how far the Blair boys have strayed off course, their spokesman is a retired permanent secretary from the permanently retired Min of Ag. Yet nobody lays the disasters of BSE or foot and mouth anywhere adjacent to his door, just as nobody blames Health for NHS sickness or Education for the endless exam disasters. Mandarins can be blamed for not spending ministers' money fast enough: otherwise, seemingly, they're in the clear.  Everyone close to the action privately acknowledges that some departments are weaker than others. Education always has been and always will be weak. Who, with ambition, wants to work there? Health is becoming a similar graveyard. Transport and local government don't go together, a jerry-built monstrosity. And anyone who deals - day-to-day - with Whitehall press offices recognises instinctively the need for a better kind of spin doctoring: these regular, neutral guys are mostly journeymen and women. Not even Nationwide League.  There's no cause for blame here, of course. How could there be? Governments come and go, and all - out loud or under their breath - agree that private management must have its public place: in schools, hospitals, local provision. But curiously, apart from a few star signings, that does not apply to the most elevated public management of the lot. There may be a whispered shortage of talent: that's why Whitehall salaries are heading for the £200,000 mark (with increasingly a pension to dream of). But there is no crisis of confidence; nor any thought that a machine running on empty for too long needs to be traded in.  Thus the aftermath of the Byers debacle (like the debacle itself) is almost impossible to follow. It asserts a success for the system which Mottram's "events" in no way bear out. It claims virtue for a neutrality which doesn't exist. It holds - uniquely in British life - that what was good for the 20th century must, unchanged and unquestioned, be good for the 21st.  More twaddle. The question about special advisers is why, in a complex age, governments need them. The question about press departments is why they aren't better at their job. The question about governance is why politicians are so shy of shifting the focus where it needs to be (that is, not always obsessively on themselves). And the question about the committee of standards in public life is whether - run by an ex-mandarin, as so much in this life is - it can break the mould of unscrutinised tradition.  Too many questions, Humphrey? Too much smoke and too little fire?  There, there minister - time to lie down while I order you a nice cup of Earl Grey.