What happened when HRH met Tony Blair and the MMR question? They debated life (and death) in the goldfish bowl, that's what. And it's right - as every last tale about Princess Margaret fills those parts of the prints not subsumed by the sum of all fears about measles - that we should join in, too. The core of the matter is kids growing up in the spotlight. Where do their rights begin and end? Our prime minister holds baby Leo's privacy dear (as he and Cherie do for all their children). But is such concern, such passionate concern, rooted in the invasion of the moment, the instant wince over this photograph or that headline? Or is it much deeper, a fear about outcomes? Does it betray a belief that press pressure today equals trouble 10 or 20 years down the road? That privacy, if you will, is a kind of normality inoculation.  There's no science to this, nothing the chief medical officer could base a campaign around. Still: 65 years ago, two little girls were growing up in Buckingham Palace. They were (just about) the most famous, most pressured little girls in the world.  One, the elder, was earnest and dutiful and a touch uncommunicative. She was in training to take the strain; to marry a suitable man, bear suitable children and provide suitably sensible leadership to her nation. Her sister, by contrast, was the pretty - and pretty wild - one. She didn't feel so much of the heat, because she was second in line and then nowhere in line. The pressure was less. Yet the lid of the pressure cooker kept blowing off.  She partied and boozed and stayed out at nights. She almost married an upright chap, and then thought better of it. She actually married a society snapper, but they both thought better of it. And so she ploughed on through more affairs, more empty bottles, more tropical nights - until the chief medical officer's warning on the packet caught up with her.  But outcomes? The earnest, dutiful, sensible girl had four children (with three divorces so far and innumerable lurid problems). The wild, mixed-up, generally deplorable girl had two children to share her bit of the goldfish bowl: they have always seemed, and still seem, refreshingly normal, grounded, industrious. There was no cause and effect.  It's worth making such parallels and drawing such lessons, however frail, because these connections clearly exist in the Blairs' minds. When the PM lamented the dead Diana, he struck a chord in himself as well as elsewhere. When he rowed in, immediately, gratuitously, to congratulate Prince Charles on his handling of Harry (and the News of the World) he made an implicit comparison.  We - that's Charlie and Cherie and Camilla and me - know how difficult it is when teenagers fall off the track. We're united in mutual sympathy, understanding, and closeness to the press complaints commission. We can phone Lord Wakeham (or whoever happens to have not stepped aside) day and night. And, by golly, we do; not to mention tame lawyers bearing injunctions. We walloped Ros Mark with the might of the law, just like HM walloped Crawfie. We know what it is to be (sort of) royal.  Now, a quick disclaimer. I remain a considerable admirer of Mr Blair, of his eloquence and energy. When Sierra Leone cheers, it behoves us to listen. And, on last week's gabby form, I'd drop Lord Haskins in the deep end and leave him there. Our prime minister still makes most of his western oppos look lumpen. So this privacy point is not, Daily-Mail-like, twisted into some broader thesis about moral rot: it seeks merely to stand alone.  If you talk about Leo through the ranks of government, you'll find a lot of support for the Blairs' line in the sand. Ministers have children, too. They are instinctively protective of them. If Tony and Cherie want to make a big thing of it, they're entitled. They have the "right". (Anyone, including press men, can relate to that.)  But what becomes of this right when other rights - other public rights - are thrown into the pot? The same ministers who defend Leo's right to second-remove silence do not, equally, doubt that the Mail's MMR bandwagon would never have rolled so fast or so disastrously if the Blairs, from day one, had said: "Sure, we know what's safe and best and necessary - and our kid's getting (or had) the triple jab".  There would have been no contorted denials or blustery defences; there would have been no "hints" or "ever stronger hints"; there would have been no subsidiary ministers, like poor Jacqui Smith, hung out to dry on Today; there would have no repeated evasion for the Mail or Sun to peg a campaign on. The prime minister would have simply told the simple truth. Leo is an MMR baby. Don't do as I say, do as I do.  In one sense, the Blairs' reticence is admirable. Better that than George Bush's hawking around private family grief over Enron (his mother-in-law lost $8,000, in case you missed it) as though random victimhood excuses all. But there is also a lack of foresight and proportion.  We can say, with fair accuracy, how many children will die over the next 10 to 15 years because they didn't get the jab. Science can do the statistics. The figures don't mean panic stations, and they certainly aren't the end of the world: but there will be deaths and there will be terrible disabilities. Treasury bean-counters, much further down the scale, can tally the price of failed advertising campaigns. Why don't we believe that doctors tell us the truth any longer? Why don't we believe politicians?  Not new questions in a world of mad cows and too many medical feet in too many mouths. GM foods have become one cross of political life. So No 10's failure, on the first day, to realise where the hints and the silences were taking it is at best sluggardly and at worst wilful. This was an avoidable disaster. It can still be mitigated - not by the spending of another £3m on ads, but by plain communication from a great communicator.  Why hasn't that long since come? Why is it still wrapped in contortions? Why is the issue itself, the privacy issue, a scab to be picked at and worried over? Because - from Amy Carter to Chelsea Clinton - the cause and the effect have never been argued through. Because trained lawyers confuse legal "principle" with what works in practice. Because the injunction and PCC game (as over Euan's college choice) has become an obsession which Charles wouldn't even try with Harry. And because we forget that people, anyway, forget.  Who remembers William Straw? Who remembers Peter Townsend, or Roddy Llewellyn? Leading is keeping your balance in the land time forgets.