I broke the habit of half a lifetime last week and filled out a job application. To Mr Stephen Bampfylde of Saxton Bampfylde Hever plc ... "Dear Sir, would you please put me on the application list to be the next parliamentary commissioner for standards?" Dispatched with a first class stamp. I am not, of course, holding my breath. The next parliamentary commissioner ought to be the present parliamentary commissioner, Elizabeth Filkin. That may still happen - and if it shows any sign of so doing, my hat comes straight out of the ring. But does Ms Filkin accept Robin Cook's bland assurance that she has been "neither sacked nor dismissed" from the job she holds? Does her heart rise at the thought that an "open and transparent system" operated by an entirely opaque House of Commons commission will graciously put her on the shortlist if she fills out one of Saxton Bampfylde Hever's forms?   Especially when she sees that her successor is offered the "possibility of (contract) extension by mutual agreement" - which means that transparency ends once she packs her bags?  I haven't talked to Elizabeth Filkin - and have no idea what she intends to do. But who, wise in the ways of Westminster, would blame her if she decided to sit this humiliation out? After three years devoted toil - and too much whispered vilification - she may reasonably conclude that enough is enough, that playing more of the House's little games merely gives succour to her enemies.  Let's fervently hope it's not so. But what if it is? Then (which is the trouble with little games) we have a nasty hiatus. For who else with her reputation, pray, will volunteer to serve three years in the Commons salt mines in a role briskly downgraded between terms - a three-day week and a lower salary if Mr Bampfylde's small print speaks true? It isn't exactly a glowing prospectus.  There will, of course, be some applications. Unemployment is on the rise again. But the Filkin reputation will be desperately hard to replicate - and the damage that her "non-dismissal" has done is manifest. MPs may prefer not to realise it, but the fight against political sleaze and public cynicism which began seven years ago goes on unremittingly. Ask Keith Vaz (if you can find him these days).   Ask Geoffrey Robinson after his three weeks in the sin bin studying investment portfolios. These barricades need manning. And the men and women who man them need to be visible, not heads sunk below the parapet.  Here's why my application went in. I've "operated at the most senior level within a complex institution" (welcome to the Guardian maze). I've a "reasonable understanding of the working of the House" - for my sins. I've trooped through privileges committee hearings and inquiries by the commissioner, given evidence to Nolan and Neill and the over-arching committee for standards in public life. Appropriate "personal standards of integrity and propriety"? This "hound from hell" could at least make the argument.  At least, if I'm known to be a contender, then you on the outside have something to measure the workings of the system and its final choice against. If you know what, in part, went in, then you can judge what came out. Three cheers for Elizabeth Filkin (or Martin Bell). No cheers for Sir Simeon Sludgeworthy.  The bitter reality, of course, is that nothing was supposed to happen this way. It wasn't what Lord Nolan prescribed in the wake of the Neil Hamilton and Tim Smith debacle. His committee for standards in public life, in its magisterial first report, wanted a parliamentary commissioner of "independent standing" who "would have the same ability to make findings and conclusions public as is enjoyed by the comptroller and auditor-general..."  Linger over that. A person of independent standing, not the servant of a committee of politicians free to disregard or water down her conclusions - and to lever her out of her job in a couple of months. A direct comparison with the comptroller and   auditor-general: Sir John Bourn has held that job by Crown appointment since 1988. His independence is guaranteed by total security of tenure.  Lord Nolan didn't get his way. MPs closed clubby ranks and Sir Gordon Downey was cast as the port of first resort, receiving complaints against Hon Members, making an initial investigation (though without any investigators on his tiny staff) and passing them on to other Hon Members for action. The "outside" influence Nolan thought so crucial to public trust and proper accountability became a transit zone. The fig-leaf tendency glimpsed sunlit uplands just over the time horizon.  Not, perhaps, without a struggle. Elizabeth Filkin has struggled mightily. She has taken the rules her political employers gave her and applied them punctiliously. Her investigations of Mr Vaz and Mr Robinson are masterpieces of forensic energy and detail. She has done her duty.  With what reward? Murmured moans from the ex-great and good on the lecture circuit. Schoolboy antics of tit-for-tat complaining across the political divide. And, most depressing of the lot, orchestrated briefing against her from "friends" of threatened ministers.  Who will rid us of this troublesome commissioner? Enter Saxton Bampfylde Hever plc. Enter due process. In an ideal world, the PM would pause in his moral sermonisings to the world and say what, as an ordinary, honourable Joe, he thinks of Ms Filkin's predicament. In an ideal world, the new chairman of the standards and privileges committee, Sir George Young, would have joined hands with Peter Bottomley and spoken on her behalf. In an ideal world, Sir Nigel Wicks, successor to Nolan and Neill, would have broken cover already. His committee has two big things on the boil. One, a big research programme on public attitudes. The other, a giant stocktake of what's been delivered on those seven reports over seven toiling years. The Filkin fiasco sits balefully under both those headings.  It was Sir Nigel who said in his first press conference early this year that Ms Filkin should be given greater power "to obtain information when investigating cases", that she shouldn't have to battle so long through the forests of Vaz or John Reid obfuscation. For "greater power", it seems, read less power and no job. In an ideal world, he'd make that point openly. He can defend the way the Department of Transport handled Jo Moore in a letter to this paper. Gratefully received. But what about Elizabeth Filkin and the basic infrastructure of Commons regulation?  Well, we'll see. At least now you know that somebody's applied, and why. Because the commissioner is a bridge to you, not a stone wall at the end of a dark alley. Because you need to be involved and concerned. I promise - famous last words - to keep you informed.