Keynes: The Twentieth Century's Most Influential Economist <br />by Peter Clarke<br />224pp, Bloomsbury, &pound;16.99  Keynes: The Return of the Master <br />by Robert Skidelsky<br />214pp, Allen Lane, &pound;20  Keynes would not have been surprised. The errors of Bill Clinton and Tony Blair, which led to runaway growth and unbounded market euphoria, were essentially intellectual. Britain and America had the misfortune to be led by two supremely clever men who were not interested in ideas. "Globalisation, free markets and light-touch regulation" became the slogans of an era which president and prime minister accepted as the sovereign prescription for prosperity. Neither Robert Skidelsky nor Peter Clarke leaves much doubt that the proponents of the "Anglo-American consensus" based their economic policies on the prejudices of private enterprise which they chose not to challenge - partly because their own inclination led them in the same direction and partly because the better option did not possess the virtue of simplicity.  Both books - despite the inevitable compression, wonderfully lucid expositions of complicated ideas - remark on the significance of the contrast between Keynes's reception on either side of the Atlantic and in continental Europe. Clarke explains that "France, with its tradition of l'&eacute;tat tut&eacute;laire rather than principled laissez-faire, did not need to be disabused of these classical fallacies". Antagonism to the state is an Anglo-Saxon syndrome. The cultural differences persist and are reflected in disagreements over the importance of an unregulated labour market and the government's role in regulating hedge funds and off-shore banking. It is worth noting that "dirigiste" France and Germany began to move out of recession earlier than Britain.  Clarke and Skidelsky will claim, with absolute justification, that their books have a more fundamental purpose than explaining the causes of today's recession. But Skidelsky takes what he calls "another Great Depression" as his starting point, and Clarke begins with the assertion that talk of a "slowdown now seems risible" since we are in "the worst [economic] scenario ... since the 1930s". Without the slump and the increasing rejection of the notion that "markets are automatically self-correcting" - a heresy which Keynes abandoned in the early 1930s - neither book would have been written. The message is that Keynes is back, not just as a name to be invoked when convenient, but as a guide through the perilous years that lie ahead.  It is with considerable trepidation that I take issue with a central point in Skidelsky's analysis, though I am comforted by the thought that my disagreement may concern politics rather than economics. There are still many opponents of economic regulation who insist that the "market is self-correcting". Indeed, I was on Any Questions when one of their number said that the banking collapse was the necessary antidote to the inflation in house prices that profligate lending had brought about. In a sense, that is right. But the market "corrects itself" at a price which is paid by the homeless, the unemployed and the low paid. It is the free-marketeer's economic equivalent of the Carthaginian peace. They make a wilderness and call it equilibrium.  The rich - often the rich whose greed and incompetence has brought the crisis about - generally escape the worst consequences of collapse. Keynes wrote that "the sound banker ... is one who, when he is ruined, is ruined in a conventional and orthodox way along with his fellows so that no one really can blame him". There have not been many of those paragons about during the last couple of years. Keynes was a meritocrat, not an egalitarian. But he would not have regarded a "correction" which basically spared the rich but penalised the poor as worth the name. As both Clarke and Skidelsky make clear, he was not just a mathematician turned economist. He was a philosopher. Despite his early insistence that personal morality was a question for individual conscience, not general agreement, he had a clear view of the good society.  Much of the attraction of both books lies in their exposition of the ideas which are overshadowed by the importance of his work on managing the economic cycle. What Gordon Brown called "the crude Keynesianism of the 70s" was the acceptance that economic activity could be stimulated by increasing "effective demand", that the increase could be promoted by "deficit financing", and that austerity - the "remedy" of the 1930s - increased rather than reduced the depression. Those fundamental truths, now accepted and acted upon by the prime minister and the president of the United States, are enough to explain Keynes's return to political acceptability. But he was the originator of other ideas that possessed greater sophistication, if less immediate application to public policy. Not all of them made as big a contribution to the management of a civilised society as The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money In his Treatise on Probability, Keynes concludes that "probability cannot simply be measured by observed frequency". No matter how often a coin is tossed, the chances of it coming down tails are always 50-50. That assertion - true if the calculation is made immediately before the coin is tossed, but dubious if the assessment is made several tosses earlier - relates to his most famous aphorism. "In the long run we are all dead" is a dangerous truth on which to construct public policy, and Keynes's judgment on the rise of the prewar dictators proves it to be so. "If we are at peace in the short run, that is something. The best we can do is put off disaster, if only in the hope ... that something will turn up." Keynes as Mr Micawber is a new gloss on a complicated personality. Keynes, Clarke tells us, was said by a colleague to have "a wonderful memory for arguments, but no memory for their authors". That selective myopia led to suggestions that he had "appropriated" the theory of effective demand from James Meade. Apparently he also "borrowed without generating any ill feeling" the concept of the "multiplier", one of those ideas which seem obvious after they have been expounded by a person of genius. The true origins of what we now call "Keynesianism" barely matter. His name has come to embody a prescription which politicians ignored at an immense cost to the people whom they represent. Skidelsky and Clarke have written books - each barely 200 pages - which ought to be required reading for every prospective minister.