A Question of Honour by Lord Michael Levy  Simon &amp; Schuster £18.99, pp320 A long life in politics is, inevitably, punctuated with regrets. I now must add to my failure to lead the Labour party or hold one of the great offices of state the comforting words which I spoke to Lord Levy during an afternoon at the height of the 'honours for sale' controversy. No doubt the Metropolitan Police were right to conclude, as I thought at the time, that Tony Blair's fund-raiser-in-chief had no case to answer. But if disloyalty was an indictable offence, he would spend the rest of his life in Wormwood Scrubs - convicted of writing a deplorable autobiography. The only possible plea in mitigation is that Levy damages himself more than he damages others. For the rest of his life he will be the man who whined that at 'his farewell gala dinner ... although Tony publicly praised and thanked a number of people who had helped him become Prime Minister and govern Britain, he made no mention of me.' In his own defence, Levy would no doubt say that confidences are no longer kept and that we live in an age of self-serving and highly remunerative revelations. But other autobiographies, reprehensible though they may be, can at least claim that they teach us something about the business of government or the pressures at the top of politics. All we learn from what is billed as 'the truth about the cash for peerage scandal' is tittle tattle. Everything of significance in the chapter on Labour party loans and gifts has already been published, in one form or another - except for the insistence that the 'decision to take loans was made by the Prime Minister in his capacity as leader of the Labour party', not by his above-reproach tennis partner. Had it not been for Blair, Levy would never have been much more than the man who managed Alvin Stardust. He has repaid his benefactor for all those photographs with the great and good - no doubt, even now, displayed on a grand piano - with a series of nasty, niggling little anecdotes. Levy tells us that, having promised Robin Cook that he would remain Foreign Secretary for a year after the 2001 general election, the Prime Minister changed his mind and replaced him with Jack Straw at the beginning of the new parliament. The story is true and Robin was certainly both disappointed and distressed by the decision. But what is to be gained by regurgitating the details now - except the possibility that the account of how Levy was employed to persuade Cook to accept demotion demonstrates that, for a moment, he was on the inside track? The story only illustrates how foolish Blair was to take Levy into his confidence. Indeed the most interesting question provoked by the whole 300 pages is why the Prime Minister became involved with such a person. What a relief to read that Murray Elder, John Smith's confidant and Gordon Brown's long-time friend, was not as susceptible to Levy's charms as Blair became. The most unpleasant passages of the book were, naturally, highlighted in the recent serialisation. But the nonsense about Levy - in the capacity of candid friend - warning Blair about his long massage sessions with Carole Caplin and the absurd account of Cherie Blair asking for advice about her husband's reliance on Anji Hunter, his long-time 'gate keeper' (with a side swipe at Fiona Millar, Alastair Campbell's partner), are not the quintessential passages of this farrago of innuendo and smear. That accolade goes to the passage describing the decision to transfer the Labour party's public-relations account from Hobsbawm Macaulay to another company. Gordon Brown's wife was a partner in the rejected firm. But Brown 'never raised the issue at the time and (Levy had) no reason to believe that he harboured any lasting resentment'. So why put the possibility in the reader's mind? As an attempt to wound without striking, or being seen to strike, it takes some beating, Tony Blair receives similar treatment. 'What is T.B. in it for? What does T.B. want out of it? Is T.B. just in it for himself?' Of course Levy never asks such questions. He just warns that they are being asked by others. Indeed he regards Blair as a 'really good man, trying to do really good things for the country'. But he chooses to embarrass and damage him with the revelation of attitudes and events that a real friend would regard as confidential. He remains devoted to the Labour party. But he harms its chances of re-election with assertions that Blair does not believe that Brown can beat David Cameron. It all adds up to a book which has only one merit. Its author has a sense of humour. Levy calls his memoir A Question of Honour.