Cold Cream: My Early Life and Other Mistakes by Ferdinand Mount 384pp, Bloomsbury, &pound;20 Long ago, when Margaret Thatcher was still prime minister, I was often distracted from even her strident performances in the House of Commons by a sight which illustrated the complicated social structure of England. Two men sat side by side in the front row of the press gallery, possessed of equally scarlet faces. But Bernard Ingham (the Downing Street press secretary) radiated the brick-red complexion of the northern working classes, while Ferdinand Mount (the head of the policy unit) glowed with the hunting-pink patina of a country gentleman. I now discover that Mount was brought up among a particular branch of the rural gentry - louche, point-to-point competitors who never worked for a living but "had a good war". Mount, plagiarising Lorenz Hart, calls them the "hobohemia". They are not the sort of people it would be a pleasure to meet. But Mount makes reading about them pure joy. It will be the story of Mount's life as acolyte to Margaret Thatcher - about a third of the book - which attracts most attention, and he provides such a vivid picture of life under her thumb that he may have made an important contribution to the history of her premiership. But what sets his account apart from other "insider" descriptions of the long-running drama is not the portrait of the star - simultaneously affectionate, critical, admiring and exasperated - but the sketches of the full supporting cast. The rightwing ideologist Alfred Sherman - "his reputation as Svengali to Margaret's Trilby already in place" - is awarded a page and a half of biography, including a mention of his service as "consultant to Radovan Karadzic of Serbia, an indicted war criminal". Then his character and role within the Conservative party is summed up in a single sentence: "The whole point of Alfred was that he was horrible and licensed to be horrible." Admiration of the style almost makes the reader forget that it was Sherman who - with the approval of Ferdinand Mount - argued that, whatever the merits of their cause, "the miners had to be beaten". Mount progressed, almost absent-mindedly, into politics via journalism. At the Daily Mail he seems to have been accepted at once - as an Old Etonian would expect - into the inner circle. So he can describe, with authority, weekends at the Rothermere country house watching films - "more likely to be The Yellow Rolls-Royce than Last Year in Marienbad". Therein lies the one real weakness of Cold Cream. Mount patronises the people about whom he writes without detaching himself from the life and values which he so succesfully satirises. His invention of the "upper class chat" in the front row of the Rothermere cinema - "Sheemie says he's not speaking to Boofy after what happened at Chatsworth" - is different in style, but not in spirit from some of the passages in the text which the reader is supposed to take seriously. "Diana, as befitted her name, was a superb steeplechase rider and dedicated to foxhunting as to any dangerous sport that came her way." It is not always easy to tell when the faint echoes of Evelyn Waugh and PG Wodehouse are intentional and when they are a reflection of Mount's character. But either way, they are great fun. Some readers will be irritated by the succession of famous and once-fashionable names that litter Cold Cream's early pages - Malcolm Muggeridge, Anthony Powell, Guy Burgess, Isaiah Berlin, Anthony Blunt, Barbara Pym, the Pakenhams, to whom he is related, and Lady Pamela Berry. Writing about them comes absolutely naturally to Mount and adds to the book's slightly antediluvian charm. They were part of his boyhood and adolescence in the way that Councillor George Buttery and Alderman Albert Ballard were part of mine. It is a matter for neither praise nor blame. But the way in which he writes about them - often in a manner they would find disobliging - is unequivocally a cause for congratulation. The class warrior in me raises the suspicion that Cold Cream is a triumph of style over content. Apart, that is, from the chapters devoted to assorted Tory grandees and functionaries. I am not usually attracted by tittle-tattle about the private lives of the famous. But occasionally it reveals something important about their characters. Mount tells us that while working for the Conservative Research Department - and courting the secretary who became his wife - Enoch Powell could only bring himself to embrace her when they were both inside a stationery cupboard. I find great consolation in the confirmation that Powell - as well as holding detestable views - was slightly barmy. Mount's judgment of Powell's mentality - as revealed by the cupboard episode - is barely more charitable than mine. He attributes the pantomime to "Enoch's taste for melodrama, his determination to inject drama into the commonplace". To my astonishment, Mount actually makes me feel sorry for Selwyn Lloyd. In the account of his last years in party politics, the Suez errand boy is a desperately sad figure, neither at ease with himself nor with the political world he chose to inhabit. Even Keith Joseph, the All Souls' intellectual who laid claim to inventing Thatcherism, is portrayed as uncertain. Mount, on the other hand, exudes the pleasure he feels at being Mount. Joseph and poor Selwyn apart, Cold Cream is a book about people with immense self-confidence - some justifying it, some not. It contains wonderful vignettes and the writing makes the inconsequential stories worth reading. But I shall cherish it for more than its elegance. If I ever need to be reminded that the class war still rages - and which side I am on - I shall read Cold Cream again.