Black Diamonds: The Rise and Fall of an English Dynasty  by Catherine Bailey  544pp, Viking, &pound;20 If books had human characteristics, Black Diamonds would suffer from a severe identity crisis. It begins with the mystery - written in the high romantic style of Baroness Orczy - of the seventh Earl Fitzwilliam's origins and the allegation that he was a changeling, smuggled into a Canadian log cabin to provide the heir that Lavinia, Lady Middleton, could not produce. It ends with the tragedy - written in the breathless prose of Elinor Glyn - of Katherine "Kick" Kennedy (JFK's sister), who married the Marquis of Hartington and, after his death in the war, became entangled with the disreputable eighth Earl Fitzwilliam and died with him in an air crash. In between the extracts from the social register, Black Diamonds contains a great deal of worthwhile information and interesting analysis about the state of affairs in and about Wentworth House and its estate. Catherine Bailey contrasts the lavish lifestyle of the Fitzwilliam-Wentworths with the grinding poverty of the miners whose sweat paid for the aristocratic extravagance. But not even the worthy meat in the sandwich is left unblemished by the book's regularly recurring flaw. The language in which some of the serious passages are written reduces its best parts to the level of society gossip. It is bad enough that the chapter on the doomed affair between Kennedy and the eighth Earl Fitzwilliam Wentworth is heralded by the single sentence, "The affair seemed madness from the start." But the real offence is the "bogus reporting" which peppers the chapters on important social questions. The visit of George V to Wentworth - meant to heal some of the wounds of the industrial upheavals of 1911 by producing newspaper pictures of the king with miners - was an important indication of the establishment's anxiety about the prospects of a general strike or worse. Black Diamonds deals with it adequately. But it is preceded by a description of the king's arrival which would be more appropriate to the beginning of a short story in Lady's Home Journal. "Walking briskly through the corridors, the housekeeper missed nothing. From time to time she stopped to adjust the arrangements in the vases of flowers or to knead the bowls of potpourri to release their aroma into the air." The irritation caused by such flaws is increased by the way in which they diminish the chapters of Black Diamonds that have something sensible, and sometimes important, to say. The verbatim accounts of the miners' attitude to what south Yorkshire called "graft" - not corruption but back-breaking labour - has an air of absolute authenticity. Walter Brierley, a miner from a pit 40 miles from Wentworth who was unemployed for four years, longed to be back hewing coal. "The dependence on the state for money without having honestly earned it has made me creep within myself." Arthur Eaglestone remembered: "The most heinous of accusations lay in the terrible phrase 'He doesn't like work'." When Bailey stops writing like a romantic novelist, Black Diamonds admirably reflects both the true nobility of the inter-war miners and the undoubted degradation of the aristocracy who exploited them.