Michael Foot: A Life by Kenneth O Morgan HarperPress £25, pp568 The official biography is a dangerous book to write, especially if the subject is still alive and has made a personal choice of the author. Criticism reads like ingratitude and compliments are dismissed as obligations that were accepted with the contract. Fortunately, Kenneth O Morgan's record as both an academic and popular historian protects him from suspicion that he wrote Michael Foot: A Life without observing the rules of objectivity that a serious work on the career of a major politician requires. For most of the 494 pages of main text, Morgan's judgments of Foot are elegantly balanced. In the Fifties, he became 'an icon of the left, a star of pamphlet, platform and now television', but also ' ... an agitator of protest, not a politician of power'. Yet in the midst of the accurate narrative and careful analysis, there is one extraordinary lapse of memory or error of judgment. On page 436 (as incredulous readers can confirm for themselves), Morgan examines why and how Michael Foot became leader of the Labour party and concludes, with masterly understatement, that it was not 'in order to win an election'. He was elected 'to keep the party together'. But, dubious though that contention is, it cannot compete for improbability with what Morgan goes on to claim about the way in which Foot discharged that duty: 'This he did with patent sincerity and literary flair.' In fact, he did not do it at all. He certainly tried. But during the first year of his leadership, Labour suffered a split that was worse than anything in its history except possibly the schism led by Ramsay MacDonald in 1931; and the number of defections from both the parliamentary party and the party in the country were far greater than those that followed the creation of the National Government. And, unpleasant though the fact may be, it was all precipitated by the choice of Foot as leader. A couple of weeks before Jim Callaghan's resignation, I discussed the party's future with David Owen as we walked from the TUC to the House of Commons. Owen told me: 'It looks as if Denis [Healey] will get it and we'll be all right for another three years.' Last week, to confirm what I remembered, I asked Lord Owen if he would have left a Labour party that was led by Healey. He replied that the thought would not have entered his head. Nobody doubts that Healey would have produced a better election result than Michael Foot managed in 1983. We must not create the myth that Healey's defeat in the leadership election was necessary for the party's welfare. The crucial votes that guaranteed Healey's defeat came from craven members of the parliamentary Labour party who mistakenly believed that troublemakers in their constituencies would quieten down if an old left-winger became leader. They preferred the certainty of Labour losing the next general election to the risk of being ejected from their safe seats. Their cowardice was compounded by the treachery of a group of Social Democrat defectors who postponed their resignation from Labour until they had voted for the party leader who in their estimation was most likely to guarantee electoral disaster. Morgan identifies three of them. They did not think that Healey was the wrong choice to lead a revival. To describe the Eighties as they really were is not to diminish Michael Foot, particularly since some of the problems arose from his natural inclination towards tolerance and understanding. Foot was, and still is, a great man who deservedly inspires affection as well as admiration. But greatness comes in different shapes and sizes. Foot's gifts are not of the sort that make a successful party leader. Morgan is right to quote me, among others, in applauding the brilliance with which Foot led the House of Commons and kept the Lib-Lab Pact alive for the last two years of the Callaghan government. He was an equally adept Secretary of State for Employment who won the continued, if grudging, support of the TUC for the incomes policy, which was essential to the survival of the administration. But although, as this biography makes clear, Foot was a very good minister, Morgan's analysis always leaves the impression that he was, or would have been, even better at something else. And that, I suspect, is true. He was for the pen, not the sword, and believed that words spoke louder than actions. Foot was the greatest polemicist of his day, whose speeches and pamphlets - denouncing both the Tory government and the Labour governments of which he disapproved - no other controversialist could match. He is blessed with the supreme virtue of loyalty to such doomed causes as Plymouth Argyle's promotion into the Premiership and Barbara Castle's survival in the cabinet after Jim Callaghan replaced Harold Wilson as Prime Minister. And, almost half a century after his death, Aneurin Bevan remains a crucial influence on Foot's view of politics. When I invited him to take part in a television programme that I was narrating to mark the centenary of Clement Attlee's birth, he immediately told me: 'He should have made Nye Foreign Secretary.' But Foot also possesses an attribute which, while attractive in a normal human being, is a disastrous quality in a modern politician. He is an incurable romantic, hence his admiration for the Disraeli of his imagination. The real thing, the opportunist who destroyed his leader by supporting the Corn Laws (which he knew to be wrong) and then renewed his opposition when it was necessary for his own promotion, would have only excited Foot's contempt. Morgan makes clear that despite all the tribulations - the ill health, the uncertainties of youth and early manhood and the high propensity to suffer minor accidents - Michael Foot is blessed with an advantage that has seen him through life's vicissitudes inside and outside politics. He is, above all else, a rounded personality with the hinterland that Denis Healey, his vanquished opponent, rightly identified as essential to the civilised man. That made it a pleasure to work with him and serve under him, whatever the political prospect.