A Very British Strike  by Anne Perkins 356pp, Macmillan, &pound;20 Challenge to Democracy<br/> by Ronald McIntosh 400pp, Politico's, &pound;25 Miners and those who support their causes have always had long, but selective, memories. It has helped to create the esprit de corps which, combined with a courage that their trade demanded, made them fight on long after their industrial battles had been lost. In A Very British Strike, Anne Perkins writes of Black Friday, April 15 1921. On that day, the leaders of the transport and rail unions refused to strike in support of their allies, the miners. This "was branded on the souls of all good trade unionists as the moment when the timid leadership sacrificed the miners". In my experience the resentment was more specific. When, in 1950, I canvassed in a general election for the first time, one of my companions was Les Higgins, a railway guard. When I got home the account of my activities was interrupted by my mother, as soon as Higgins was mentioned. "The railwaymen deserted us in 1921." Black Friday was redeemed. On May 1 1925, the miners - having swallowed their pride and allowed the TUC to join in the negotiations - won a spectacular victory. Within days of the prime minister, Stanley Baldwin, announcing that "all workers ... have to take reductions in wages to help put industry on its feet", he capitulated with the announcement that the government would pay the difference between the owners' offer and the miners' demands until the commission of inquiry into the industry reported. The union celebrated Red Friday in the belief that, as long as the workers were united, they were invincible. That notion comes in the category of romantic but wrong. Nine months later, the subsidy ended, and it is clear from Perkins's incisive analysis how the general strike came about. Her comprehensive account of how it progressed shows that the miners' cause was doomed from the start. Much blame was heaped on those trade unionists who either fought with the miners half-heartedly or refused to fight at all. But the real problem was the state of the industry. Thanks to the debilitated condition of the economy - exacerbated by Winston Churchill's decision to return to the gold standard - many pits were near to bankruptcy. Greedy owners combined with fearful miners to oppose closures. That meant that a national settlement with "not a penny off the pay, not a minute on the day" was a heroic but unattainable aspiration. The claim that the miners could win was a cruel deception. I was brought up in the belief that AJ Cook, the secretary of the Miners' Federation, was the hero of 1926. As Perkins makes clear, without resorting to the crude device of actually saying so, Cook - all rhetoric and no strategy - undermined the prospects of the claim which he supported at least as effectively as did Jimmy Thomas, the NUR general secretary who was officially designated a traitor. Ramsay Macdonald feared that "there will be a general strike to save Arthur Cook's face". That is only one of the parallels between 1926 and 1984 which the perceptive Perkins identifies. Arthur Scargill remembered Cook's rhetoric but forgot his tactical ineptitude. Although I was wrong about the hero of the general strike, I always correctly identified the slightly comic villain. It was Churchill, a man who in Perkins's memorable phrase "thought consensus was for the common people". The obsession with the communist conspiracy to conquer the world - which had made him the chief advocate of a British expedition to support the White Russian rearguard - convinced him that the general strike was a prelude to a Bolshevik revolution. Throughout, his behaviour was almost as intolerable to his colleagues in government as it was intentionally provocative to his enemies in the TUC. He insisted that "food convoys" were accompanied by totally unnecessary armoured cars in order to increase public apprehension about the prospects of an armed insurrection and he was encouraged by the prime minister to edit the British Gazette - a propaganda news sheet - because it diverted him from attempts to take over the BBC. Churchill's responsibility for the deteriorating terms of trade, which made the price of British coal uncompetitive, is slightly mitigated by an incident which Perkins reports with admirable understatement. Immediately after Baldwin made him chancellor of the exchequer - more to entice him back into the Tory party than in the hope of rescuing the economy - Churchill was advised by Treasury civil servants to return to the gold standard, thus overvaluing the pound. "He arranged a dinner party to hear the arguments on both sides. Keynes under-performed and Churchill decided to take the advice of his official." That made British coal even more uncompetitive. The general strike was the inevitable consequence. The general strike lasted for nine days. The miners remained proud, poor and in dispute for another eight months. They were driven back to work by hunger, with the bitter conviction that if the other unions had been equally brave, justice would have prevailed. Almost 50 years later they squared up to the owners and government. "Almost certainly in explicit recognition of the 'betrayal' of 1926, the NUM refused to solicit support from the TUC." In every other particular, history repeated itself. After 1926, the miners have been the regular scapegoats for government failures to manage the economy successfully, and the NUM has taken a special pride in fighting to the last ditch. The union created the conditions that encouraged Ted Heath to commit political suicide and, according to Challenge to Democracy, the diaries of Sir Ronald McIntosh, it continued to menace the nation. On November 22 1974, McIntosh - director general of the National Economic Development Council (Neddy) - was told by the permanent secretary at the Department of Employment "that the NUM militants would force through a high settlement ... and that there would be a balance of payments collapse". And so it, more or less, turned out. The modern equivalent of Red Friday was followed 10 years later by the blackest days in the coal industry's history. The badly led union chose the wrong moment to strike and was beaten. Margaret Thatcher's scheme to destroy the industry proceeded according to plan. McIntosh's diary - published a respectable 30 years after the events which it records took place - relates to an age and economic attitude which now seem almost as distant as the general strike. The author himself - dapper, supremely self-confident and immensely able - was typical of an earlier type of civil servant. It was a time when officials, no less than ministers, believed in the power of the government in a way which is certainly out of fashion today. McIntosh describes a statement made by the prime minister at a press conference as "good and very helpful". Not surprisingly. The operative paragraph began: "Neddy is to mastermind the whole programme." It is inconceivable that a prime minister of any party would say that today. Diaries of the McIntosh sort leave readers with the impression that the author spent most of his time in restaurants. And there is no doubt that McIntosh took lunch very seriously. Some of the reports of his assignations are instructive. On October 5 1976 he lunched with his old friend Roy Jenkins at Brooks's Club. Jenkins, on his way to become president of the European Communities Commission, thought that an economic crisis was "calculated to produce a political change" and said "a little wistfully" that he wondered if he had been right to leave British politics at this time. So the idea of a new centre party had begun to germinate in Jenkins's head three years before the idea became public. But the diaries' importance is the record which they provide of a dead civilisation. McIntosh was one of the gentleman in Whitehall who knew best.