Walking Ollie <br />by Stephen Foster <br />224pp, Short Books, &pound;9.99 Dog owners are born, not made. Or, if dog-owning is not a genetically induced passion, the need to possess one is likely to have been made irresistible by early environment. When I was six weeks old, Mick - my mother's fox terrier and the best rat catcher in the north Nottinghamshire coalfield - was found standing menacingly astride me in my pram. Long after Mick was dead, my parents argued about his motives. The disagreements always ended, after a long period of brainwashing, with my father agreeing that the dog's intentions had been benign. I listened to those disputes throughout my childhood, youth and early manhood. During that time we owned Teddy and Dinah and encouraged Bessie, from up the road, to spend her time with us. As a result of both the company and conversation I never doubted that I was for dogs and dogs were for me. Stephen Foster, on the other hand, had to acquire the feeling that he needed a canine companion. If Walking Ollie is to be believed, he acquired the lurcher as an act of kindness (to the dog and to his human partner) after examination of a dog book. No wonder that he found the early months of ownership heavy going. Owning a dog is not social work. It is a compulsion. It is because Foster failed to become obsessive that he turned all fastidious at the idea of "picking up" - the euphemism for removing dogs' excrement from public places. To avoid performing this essential task, he "does not walk on pavements with narrow green sward alongside" or cross the road at traffic lights. My dog, Buster - being trained in that respect if few others - defecates at regular times of day at easily anticipated locations. But retrieving, in a plastic bag, what he leaves behind never bothers me. How could I be repelled by anything that is associated with Buster? When Foster finally decides to share his life with a lurcher, he seems surprised that he has to prove that he is worthy of owning a dog. A similar cross-examination, when he thought of acquiring a vizsla, appears to have caused him less concern. Perhaps he thought that thoroughbreds should be treated with more consideration than crossbreeds. There is only one distinction between mongrels and dogs with pedigrees. Mongrels are brighter. Even that does not matter. Dogs are intrinsically endearing. Walking Ollie, being about a dog, is endearing too. It did not take long for Ollie - the eventual name of the lurcher that Foster acquired - to win over his new owner. And Foster quickly acquired some of the characteristics of the true canine devotee. It is dogs, not girls, that he looks at as they pass him in the street, and he is already worrying about how he will survive without Ollie. He has not quite reached the stage of absolute infatuation. I do not agonise about how to deal with Buster's death. I do not allow myself to think about it. When the prospect forces its way into my mind, it confirms my atheism. If there were a God, He would make dogs live as long as humans. Part of my obsession with dogs has an unhealthy connection with my mother's constant (and genuine, if embarrassingly misguided) conviction that every animal not under her care or supervision was lost, neglected or cruelly treated. I must, therefore, not overstate my anxiety about Ollie's prospects. But integrity requires me to report that he was once run over - sign of a careless owner or lack of training - and was also taken on a walk when the temperature was "heading up to 100F". Foster even went on holiday to Greece without him. In his diaries, Buster explains how I solved the dilemma about my regular summer excursions to Tuscany. I do not go to Tuscany any more. Part of Walking Ollie's charm is the problem that Foster faces in his attempts to establish a modus vivendi between man and dog. Ollie is enuretic. More disturbing, at least to me, he fails to recognise rabbits as things that must be pursued. My mother used to say: "There are no bad dogs, only bad owners." On the same principle, I believe that canine neurosis is a transmittable disease, caught from human beings. Foster's difficulties can be explained by reference to the first six words on page 117, "As a break from university stress . . ." His problem is not the stress. It is the university. He over-intellectualises what should be an emotional relationship. Owning a dog is not easy - particularly a dog of character. Friends of mine occasionally look after a greyhound which was rescued by their daughter. When I first saw it, I was astonished (since they are persons of discretion) by what I believed to be a huge pottery dog in the living room. It did not move for an hour. Better by far to have such a dog than no dog at all. But better still to have a dog like Ollie. He is trouble. But he is also a joy. So is reading about him. Walking Ollie is the best book about a dog for . . . let us say eight years.