The Barretts of Wimpole Street has a lot to answer for. It is by no means the worst play to be broadcast on Radio 4 on a Saturday afternoon. But, together with that extraordinary first letter from Robert Browning - "I love your poetry Miss Barret and I think I love you too" - it has created the legend of the frail young woman with heavy hair who eloped to Italy with the muscular Christian poet and, 15 years later, died in his arms. The facts on which the legends are built are true. But Elizabeth Barrett Browning was much more than the subservient invalid which so many of the comments that surrounded the bicentenary of her birth have made her out to be. The room with a view, from which the young EM Forster looked out across the Arno, is in a direct line of sight to Casa Guidi, in which the Brownings made their Florentine home. The plaque on the wall sets out Elizabeth's achievements - patriot, scholar and poet of the Risorgimento. It mentions, as an afterthought, that Robert Browning also lived there. I doubt if he resented the Italian precedence that his wife enjoyed. He believed that she had written "the finest love sonnets in the English language since William Shakespeare", and, by accident or design, she certainly followed where Shakespeare led. "If thou must love me, let it be for nought" is an echo of Sonnet 116: "Love is not love which alters when it alteration finds". Both proclaim that "love for her smile, her look, her way" is not an "ever-fixed mark that looks on tempests and is never shaken". How many other poets' work can be combined with Shakespeare's in a single sentence without seeming embarrassingly inferior? Yet, Sonnets from the Portuguese were the lighter side of Elizabeth Barrett Browning's poetry. Her more serious work was very serious indeed. Every three or four years, I determine to write her biography. So every three or four years I read Aurora Leigh, according to its author a "novel in verse". Its 1,100 lines explore the position of women - thinking women such as Elizabeth - in Victorian society. It could not have been written by a woman who had grown up as one of nature's willing victims, waiting on her chaise longue to be rescued from her tyrannical father by the poet as hero. In fact, malicious rivals whispered that Robert Browning only cultivated Elizabeth Barrett because, thanks to her superior reputation as a poet, she provided him with an easy entree into literary society. It was Elizabeth, not Robert, who - according to the gossip - was considered for nomination as poet laureate. Nineteenth-century England was not ready for the laurels to crown a woman. Nor was the establishment in tune with her politics. Elizabeth became the poet of Italian unity and liberation. Her epitaph ought to be the poems Casa Guidi Windows and Garibaldi, not "What was he doing the great God Pan, down in the reeds by the river?". Robert Browning, to his credit, rarely missed an opportunity to reinforce his wife's reputation. In May 1880, 19 years after she died, he wrote to the Reverend Hugh Reginald Haweis with a gentle rebuke. "You are misled about the poetry of EBB being almost forgotten ... The almost yearly new edition of her five volumes is out ... The demand for my own work is nothing like so large." The letter also complained of a misprint in one of his own articles - "human hair" for "human air" and "fair, like my peers" instead of "fare like my peers". But the real message was that "Elizabeth is more remembered than she ever was". By then, Browning had achieved both critical and commercial success. But it is one of his "difficult" poems that provides the best, if an unintended, tribute to his wife. It is not one of the love poems from Men and Women but the much earlier Andrea del Sarto, subtitled The Faultless Painter. Andrea - said, in his time, to be a better draughtsman than Raphael - lacked the genius that produced "ardour and admiration". Elizabeth was exactly the opposite. There are rough passages in her poetry but the quality is beyond serious dispute. The disturbingly named Sir Walter Raleigh, Oxford's first professor of English literature, compared her to Christina Rossetti. Elizabeth, he said, often lost her footing, but - unlike Christina - never feared to leap. That is the poet whose work we ought to remember this year.<br />