Is happy hour to blame for our country's decline, or the wearing of hoods? Or gay marriage? Or underage sex? In her latest analysis of our moral health, the Daily Mail's Melanie Phillips decided that a story about three teenage mothers in Derby said everything about this country's heedless saunter towards the flaming fiery pit. Their case, she warned, "perfectly illustrates the moral degradation that is bringing increasing sections of our society to its knees".  Although there is, surely, one ray of hope: the occurrence of three mothers aged 14, 15 and 18 all in the same family is still rare enough to be considered highly newsworthy by almost every national paper. Before long, no doubt, the trio of young matrons will be appearing on a new series of Celebrity Love Island cast entirely from teenage siblings on benefit. This notoriety is, to my mind, why the moral degradation that is bringing increasing sections of our society to its knees is, in fact, perfectly illustrated by a less widely reported story about two women and a handbag.  Angela Makki, a former casino manager from Gateshead, put up the handbag for auction on eBay. It was a perfectly horrible little handbag, a "Louis Vuitton papillon cherry blossom bag", 11 inches by six inches, apparently much sought after when it was launched in a limited edition in 2003, costing £595. Nowadays, the appetite for meretricious accessories is not confined to footballers' wives. Even though the papillon bags quickly sold out, Zena Bailey, an insurance underwriter from Hastings, was determined to own one. Perhaps she had hopes of promenading up and down the Hastings seafront in the steps of King Harold, with her bag attracting envious glances from all sides, for in an eBay bidding war, she offered £980, trumping an American rival by £20.  Once the bag was delivered, however, it turned out to be such an obvious fake that even the Hastings seagulls - never a very upscale flock - would not have given it a second look. On inspection, the colours were wrong, ditto the texture and the screws that prettified the straps. In court this week, Makki was ordered to repay the £980, and given a suspended six-month sentence.  Is this justice? I quote Phillips: "How can this have happened to Britain, one of the most advanced societies in the world? There was a time when standards of behaviour were upheld to which all would aspire and by which they would be judged. Sobriety, sexual restraint, hard work and abiding by the law were all held to be vital ..." And if there wasn't a time when a person who paid almost double for a piece of Louis Vuitton tat (with a fashion life expectancy of approximately two months) either kept quiet about it or expected to be branded with a scarlet B for her depravity, then there certainly should have been. As it is, there will doubtless be much sympathy for this eBay victim from thousands of other proud martyrs to luxury accessories, from Martha Stewart to our own Coleen thing, whose new column, Welcome to My World, is expected to be dedicated, almost exclusively, to her ordeals on the handbag waiting lists.  As yet, however, no one has better expressed this shameless, post-feminist preoccupation with leather goods than Kimberley Quinn, a magazine publisher's wife and the mother of Mr Blunkett's little lad. A couple of years ago she talked frankly about the importance of an £11,000 Birkin bag bought for her by her husband. "I desire neither to be in fashion, nor out of fashion. I simply wish to have the handbag that I want to have." If only all women were so easily satisfied.  As it is, all too many bag-obsessives invest repeatedly, at a rate that would only be rational if the bags doubled, say, as mobile homes, pension schemes, or all-terrain vehicles. What possesses them? Germaine Greer has asked if the tote bag could be "an exterior uterus, the outward sign of the emotional burden?" Possibly. But as Quinn could tell you, not all bags are totes. Greer's theory would not account for the allure, to Bailey, of her diminutive papillon.  What, anyway, can be done to save such women from themselves? As Phillips often protests, it is useless to expect the government to act, even in the face of catastrophic folly and decadence. Our only hope would seem to be the Advertising Standards Authority, which has recently taken upon itself a further role, as a sort of outreach worker mentoring exceptionally gullible and extravagant consumers in the avoidance of pointless extravagance. Last week it advised women that it was not possible for Estée Lauder's cream to "melt away the fatty look of cellulite". Now it cautions that having your fat wobbled by Slendertone's "muscle stimulation belt" will not make your waist "rock hard". Perhaps it should also warn the over-accessorised that possession of scores of unworn Jimmy Choos is not so much an asset as a badge of shame, that a pair of Mukluks is as good as a dunce's cap, and that the ostentatious deployment of an insanely overpriced bag acts on most right-thinking people much as an infant in the arms of a teenager does on Phillips: only to inspire appalled reflections on the collapse of western civilisation. Unless the bag is a fake. But how can you tell?  A shiny new exhibition The Natural History Museum shows great enterprise in borrowing a big diamond from de Beers for an exhibition of "some of our planet's rarest and most seductive gems", even if there is a risk that its reverential display of the de Beers Millennium Star (celebrated for not having been stolen from the Millennium Dome) might quite eclipse more conventional exhibits.  Although there will always be an audience for the animatronic dinosaur and scary earthquake room, the museum's static collections of, say, cretaceous dinoflagellate cysts, may well appear a little dull, or at least strikingly unshiny, to the visitor who has just - as the museum's promotional material puts it - stepped "into the glamorous world of diamonds", marvelled at the heavily guarded Steinmetz Pink ("the world's largest fancy vivid pink flawless diamond"), gazed in wonder at the Ocean Dream, and admired other illustrious items, including a jewelled dress worn by Samantha Mumba at the premiere of Spider-Man 2.  Still, the exhibition is sure to attract enthusiastic crowds, who will no doubt leave with a new appreciation of one of the sponsors' slogans: a diamond is for ever. And if de Beers, Steinmetz ("one of the largest customers of de Beers") and the Diamond Trading Company are lucky, these visitors might even be sufficiently stirred, after their encounter with so much instructive natural history, to go and seek out diamonds in their natural habitat, the jeweller's shop.