If evidence of their leader's dwindling popularity were not glum enough, "senior aides in Downing Street" are, according to the Spectator's political editor James Forsyth, "much struck by polling that shows that 40% of Britons would emigrate if they could". Should the aides take the snub so personally? True, this level of disenchantment does not say much for Mr Cameron's trademark wellbeing index, particularly in the context of precious, national pick-me-ups such as the jubilee flotilla, the Olympics and the glorious sinking of the Titanic. On the other hand, to threaten to leave the country because of its high rate of taxation is as deeply Tory as tax avoidance itself. Could it say something extremely positive, in fact, about the democratisation of greed, that more and more people want nothing more than to follow the party's former treasurer, Michael Ashcroft, to his beloved home in Belize, to try life in Guernsey, like another party treasurer (resigned), "Spotty" Rowland, or to emulate another Cameron favourite and adviser, Philip Green, whose wife's residence in Monaco has snagged the couple tax savings of an estimated £285m? Nor is the noble impulse to seek refuge in some of the most noxious places on Earth, rather than pay tax, confined to British retail, banking and business operatives. A few years ago, the Cameron supporter and former YBA Tracey Emin explained why she was thinking of leaving Britain. Admittedly, unlike more adventurous emigres who are willing to endure exile in unspeakably vulgar or otherwise harsh conditions, far from family or friends or anything we might recognise as civilisation, Emin's destination was her holiday home in the Var. She was vexed by the imposition of a 50p tax rate on income of more than £150,000, which would "mean me paying about 65p in every pound with tax, national insurance and so on". And there were other annoyances, familiar to anyone who has looked at expat message boards. "So much here is simply not working now," she explained. "The taxes are too high, there aren't enough incentives to work hard and our politicians have put me off. We're paying through the nose for everything." Wisely, as it turns out, Emin appears to have given her country another chance. Now, thanks to George Osborne, she no longer pays 65p in the pound to stay in broken Britain, while her fellow artists in France tremble at the Socialist candidate François Hollande's threatened 75% tax on earnings over €1m. With enough French people here already to warrant a dedicated election campaign, MigrationWatch must be worrying about how South Kensington can possibly accommodate a second influx of desperate creatives, to say nothing of the threat to the indigenous intellectual and busking communities. The singer Françoise Hardy, for instance, whose 1962 song Tous les garçons et les filles is currently finding a new audience via the Greek film Attenberg, has spoken about fleeing to London should Hollande's tax prevail. "I'll have to sell my apartment," she says. "I'll be on the street." Although, given the fabled wealth of her baby-boomer contemporaries, a warm welcome for Mme Hardy cannot be in doubt, it is Britain's alleged inundation by other homeless immigrants from all over the world that, to judge by emigration forums, inspires much of the restlessness and disenchantment now exercising the government. Those Britons who do leave their parents in the hands of incomers and themselves become immigrants to somewhere else are, however, hailed as enterprising doers we can ill afford to lose. David Jones, for example, a father of 12 whose loathing of benefit "scroungers" has earned him near-celebrity red-top status and the designation "Britain's hardest-working father", was lionised in the papers again last week for another heroic act: quitting. "I feel like the way the UK is at the moment that the opportunities I want for my children are not going to be there," Jones told the Daily Mail, prior to flying to Brisbane, where he arrives with neither job nor home. Given the huge number of online-commenting expats who like to dwell, whatever the ostensible topic, on how vastly superior to benighted Britain is their adopted home in Hong Kong, Singapore, UAE, Malaysia, Saudi etc, it was to be expected that Mr Jones would be cheered for confirming that the UK is still the corrupt, costly, overtaxed, cold, overcrowded, criminal, scrounger-ridden, unmannerly cesspit they left behind. For instance, wrote another Australia settler: "This place is a gold mine, I'm living proof. Birmingham turns my stomach every time I visit." In the event, along with sympathetic responses, dozens of posts informed the hard-working yet impulsive Mr Jones that, like Spain, Portugal, Greece, France, Canada and other traditional escape routes, Australia no longer offers cheap housing and an eternity of carefree picnics at 1950s prices. "We are doing up our house to sell so we can come back to England perhaps not having to work 14-hour days in Melbourne," wrote one de-emigre. So where to? For expats, pref non-gay, who are inspired by Bahrain employee John Yates to exchange a few British freedoms for an improved quality of barbie, Malaysia, Hong Kong, Dubai and Qatar are all recommended, with the proviso that some of the locals may practise the very cultural attitudes that make some would-be emigrants feel like strangers in their own country. Moreover, for what it's worth, a recent world happiness index indicates that, even without a tropical climate and white-sand beaches, the much disrespected Salford might be a better place to live than, say, Kuala Lumpur, since Malaysia came 51st to Britain's 18th – still comfortably above Singapore (36th). For true employee happiness, however, the BBC should have moved everyone, lock, stock and barrel to northern Europe, where the happiness scores of high-taxed Denmark, Finland, Norway and the Netherlands suggested, once again, that George Osborne is inimical to national wellbeing. Philip Green, you gather, would not be happy there. Unless, as Horace suggested a while back, we take our happiness, or discontent, with us. However, a recent, admittedly biased – being self-selecting – poll of Guardian readers showed almost 70% are still dreaming of escape, undeterred by evidence that formerly dependable bits of abroad can unexpectedly turn costly, overtaxed, criminal, corrupt, polluted, unmannerly, xenophobic or restrictive and even, though it is hard to imagine, produce native versions of Livingstone and Johnson. Just reading some would-be emigres' comments was a reminder of how great it can be to live in Britain and not only because it makes you face the bald, comparative facts about human rights, healthcare, housing, schools, pensions. Where else do you find this furious, uncensored brew of romance, humour and self-loathing, expressed with a rage that comes off the screen? Not, at a guess, in the little kingdom of Bhutan, where happiness famously comes first. Frustratingly for would-be emigres to that smiliest of realms, it appears to be a condition of general contentment that no immigration is encouraged, not even from Britain.