A little girl is discovered freezing on the steps of a council flat. It is November, she is barefoot and tears slide down her bruised face. Child B, as she is now known, is taken into care. There are 43 wounds and scars on her body, but the first doctor to examine her does not notice them. Later, she will claim that it was late afternoon and the light was dim. So, in due course, Child B goes home. Only when she moves to a different borough is her plight uncovered. She has been slapped and starved, hit with a shoe and belt, cut with a knife, had chilli peppers rubbed into her eyes and been zipped into a laundry bag to make her think she would be thrown away. Her torturers believe she is a witch. At the Old Bailey last week, three people, including Child B's aunt, were convicted of cruelty. Post-Climbié children's services, packed with failsafes, proved laggardly in noticing that Salem had settled in 21st-century London. Hundreds of other African children may be subjected to ritual abuse by churches and carers, but Child B, now eight, is safe with a foster family. Though she is said to be well and happy, it is hard to imagine a more tragic life. Her parents died in the Angolan conflicts, her relatives tortured her for 15 months and her God and her adopted country failed her. Some histories defy a fairytale ending. There will be inquests and inquiries. A head may roll, a system be tweaked and never-again promises delivered. Despite evidence to the contrary, tragedies like Child B's are always regarded as aberrations. Their particularity consoles the fearful and assuages public dread. Though sympathy and rage are universal, witchcraft is strictly for other people's cultures and other people's children. Even so, Child B's story may have a wider relevance for a society more willing than it thinks to conjure evil spirits from the ether. Another child-centred alarm erupted last week when a boy of five was discovered, distressed and wandering alone near his home in Dewsbury, west Yorkshire, with bruises to his neck. Several older children were questioned before a 12-year-old girl was accused of inflicting grievous bodily harm and perverting the course of justice. She will appear at a youth court this week. The two cases have nothing in common, other than their purchase on moral panic. Fear for children and fear of children are suddenly the defining themes of public life. Yobs strut Britain's estates, instilling terror. Last week, a boy of 16 admitted the manslaughter of a father of two, 10 days after receiving an antisocial behaviour order. Newspaper headlines bewail a mutant generation. According to one report, we have bred 'a nation of children without a soul'. The theme of warped youth became the heartbeat of a third Labour term, when the Prime Minister pledged, in the first speech of his administration, to excise disrespect from a corroded society. That mission began long ago at the graveside of James Bulger, the Merseyside toddler. Soon after his murder, Tony Blair declared the killing 'a hammer blow against the sleeping conscience of the country'. The creed of respect delivered a few weeks ago was the echo and affirmation of an old vow. If the Prime Minister exploited a child's death, so did others. The screams for Robert Thompson and Jon Venables to hang have been flung at other killers, old and young, down the years. Murders committed by children under 17 dropped from 24 in 1993 to nine in 2003, but statistics have no leverage on fear. Twelve years after James Bulger died, the monster has come of age. In Greater Manchester, a man lies in a coma as a 15-year-old is questioned over his attempted murder. Adults still fear for their own defenceless children. On the evidence of last week's scares alone, they must be protected from aircraft noise, electricity pylons and reading methods not involving synthetic phonics. But grown-ups are scared now on their own behalf. Precocity wasn't, in the end, all about lipgloss for five-year-olds or having sex too young. It was about stealing the ultimate grown-up weapon, that of punishment. The cruel child was around long before Flora and Miles, the demonic angels in The Turn of the Screw. These days, he or she comes in many guises. In Hackney, he wears a hoodie. In Sudan, he carries a gun and kills with the efficiency of someone who lacks a grown-up's patina of conscience, fear, scruple or compassion. Obviously, child soldiers are victims. So are some spotty window-smashers with hellish families, but pity is selective. Those who want public sympathy should be pre-pubescent, pretty and, for preference, dead. Or tortured or mistaken for a witch. Many children disappear or meet terrible fates at the hands of their parents and carers, but public grief is for the few. Damilola Taylor, Sarah Payne, Holly and Jessica were all talismans of a childhood that exists only in myths and morgues. The tortured, such as Victoria Climbié and Child B, had no idyllic moment, but they appal and reassure us just as the golden children do. They also are the innocents, an unsullied model of childhood in an age of the imperfect. Demonising children began with the Bulger trial and it was supposed to end there. But the national panic never died and many abhorred the killers' eventual release. Redemption is the last taboo for those who cannot bear its subtext: monsters are sometimes just like us. When did we lose our mercy, and why do we never notice that our shock over cases like Child B's masks a disregard for the smaller casual cruelty of adults? Last week, a study by the Howard League told the story of 'Jack', a 16-year-old abuse victim in council care, who was dumped at Christmas straight from prison into a bed-and-breakfast hostel with no one to meet or help him. The report went unremarked. Any official failure of Child B must be properly investigated, but children need a review more comprehensive than another exorcism of social services' procedures. When Mr Blair first annexed the Bulger case, he should have heeded calls for criminal responsibility to be raised from 10, an age when children cannot even fully grasp the irreversibility of death. He should have accepted that demanding responsibility involved giving children their basic rights, as stipulated by the UN. He did neither. Instead, his speech of 1993, and its reprise, unleashed something perilous. The risk is that Britain is manufacturing the monsters it most fears. No one likes yobs. But if feckless families are abetted by the politics of doom, young people will surely fulfil all the prophecies foretold for them. The conscience of the country may be sleeping still, but its fear-seeking antennae have rarely been less dormant. Sometimes, as in the case of Child B, horror is the only human response. Too often, though, outrage is not for the young but against them. A nation that loves children is more prone to witchhunts than it cares to think. 