Financial prudence may have ordained the death of Harold Shipman. By hanging himself on the eve of his fifty-eighth birthday, he was exploiting a legal loophole which will allow his widow, Primrose, to receive £100,000, tax free, plus an annual pension of £10,000. Had he lived beyond 60, she would have got a pittance.  Even if the five warders on duty at Wakefield prison had grasped the overlap between home accountancy and self-destruction, it might have been hard for them to have prevented such a Prufrockish demise. Suspected or convicted murderers account for a fifth of prisoners who commit suicide. By the nature of their trade, they are good at it. Fred West successfully followed the example of Hitler and Himmler. Ian Huntley came close.  Since routine 24/7 scrutiny is expensive and intrusive, perhaps the end of a man who murdered at least 215 others was unavoidable. That still leaves the question of whether it was appropriate to dispatch Shipman with quite such glee. 'Ship, Ship Hooray,' read the Sun's front-page headline, while commentators deplored the waste of money in holding an inquiry.  Much better to declare good riddance and spend the cash on flute lessons for young offenders. Shipman's death must refocus attention on tragic people killing themselves in record numbers in Britain's jails. So copious was this sermonising that it left no space for any national newspaper to report the death of April Sherman.  Last Tuesday morning, exactly 24 hours after Harold Shipman was cut down from his cell bars, Ms Sherman was driven from her cell at Edmunds Hill prison in Suffolk to Ipswich Crown Court. Following a domestic row, she faced a charge of wounding her partner. No plea was entered and the judge rejected the application for bail, made on the grounds that she had been in no trouble since a minor, drink-related offence three years ago. She was remanded in custody until 5 March.  Ms Sherman, aged 27, had never been in prison before the current episode. Her remand meant that her two-year-old son had to be placed in emergency care. At 8pm, a few hours after she returned from court, she was found hanging in her cell. The officers who tried in vain to resuscitate her must have felt a familiar despair. April Sherman was the second woman prisoner to die in Edmunds Hill in the last nine days. The first, Tina Bromley, was serving a four-month sentence.  April Sherman never threatened to kill herself. No one knows if shock or being parted from her child helped persuade her that her life had become intolerable. Her solicitor, David Stewart, echoes the point made by the Howard League and others. There are few parallels between the knowing suicide of a convicted killer and the lethal desperation of a young woman innocent in the eyes of the law.  April Sherman, the sixteenth female to have killed herself in prison since January 2003, is one in a multitude. A record 105 inmates committed suicide last year, as the toll ratchets up in line with the prison population, now 74,000 and expected to rise to 93,000 by 2009.  The dead are tagged with familiar labels. They are the lonely, the mentally ill, the bullied, the self-harmers and the criers for help who never realised how seamless the transition between hard lives and easy deaths can be. 'Why won't the dead die?' the last survivor cries in Eugene O'Neill's Mourning Becomes Electra, but these ghosts haunt almost nobody.  Public inertia does not betoken lack of interest in violent death. Fired up by domestic cruelty and global terror, US academics offer necromaniac societies two new categories of suicide. The suicide-murder is the province of those too cowardly to kill themselves and who, like Gary Gilmore, slaughter others purely to end up on Death Row. Conversely, the murder-suicide is for jihadist terrorists for whom the murder impulse takes precedence over any wish to die.  In an age obsessed with reasons for violence, children hanging themselves in prisons where they should never be causes no ripple. Nor do the deaths, highlighted by Mind, of psychiatric patients in custody. As the inquiry into Shipman's death begins, Inquest, the campaigning charity, still awaits a Home Office response to its campaign, launched two months ago, for a similar investigation into the suicide of Joseph Scholes.  Joseph, an abused and deeply depressed 16-year-old was jailed despite warnings that custody might kill him. Barring a crusade headed by his mother, Yvonne, he would simply have slipped, like April Sherman, into a statistical shadowland. The furore over Shipman's death is not for them. But, despite the skewed priorities and different circumstances, there is a human and practical link between a professional's suicide and the amateurs who never really wanted to die.  David Ramsbotham, the former chief inspector of prisons, warns that the Home Secretary's edict that life sentences are for ever perilously removes all hope from the most brutal killers. Longer tariffs for others will, inevitably, breed dangerous cell-blockers with nothing to lose. The result - crammed prisons, insufficient care and a shrivelling focus on rehabilitation - will automatically mean more suicides.  That prospect sits uneasily with potentially hopeful moves, such as the prison ombudsman's investigation into suicides, launched a fortnight ago. In addition, David Blunkett is adamant that courts must end their love affair with jail, an ambition incompatible with tough-sentencing legislation. The confusion extends from the practical to the metaphysical.  Brian Caton, general secretary of the Prison Officers' Association, offered this epitaph to Shipman. 'While it's a loss of a human life, it is the loss of one of the vilest humans in the country.' No moral philosopher could take issue with this truism, except that Mr Caton and his members are not supposed to be invigilating a personality contest. Their duty is to ensure that those deprived of their freedom cannot exercise the ultimate human right of ordaining their own deaths.  Too often, they fail. Whether or not that lapse is preventable, custodians at all levels should not be able to hide either behind indifference to the fate of the despairing or media gloating that another loathsome killer has availed himself of Britain's DIY death penalty. Societies are judged on how they treat their vilest for good reason. That benchmark is also the measure of how they treat their excluded, their rejects and their helpless.  Such people are often difficult to save. They evoke no automatic sympathy and their cases offer no simple solution. By contrast, mass murder is cosily reductive. Opposition to granny-killing is an issue round which the nation can cluster, secure in its revulsion. Who cares about the fate of psychopaths? If they find prison life an earthly hell, then what is wrong with their commuting a life-means-life sentence into the life-means-death variety?  Harold Shipman, in the view of those who celebrate his exit, did not deserve to live. Such certainty absolves the virtuous from worrying that April Sherman, and the many others who will never again see their parents or their children, did not deserve to die.  