Yesterday saw the launch of the Intermittent custody scheme in prisons, known informally as home and away. Judges henceforth have the power, in two pilot prisons, to mete out sentences that only apply on certain days of the week. Friday-to-Sunday terms are designed for offenders who want to keep their jobs. Monday to Thursday terms are for offenders who just really like weekends. The two institutions are Kirkham, a men's prison in Lancashire, and Morton Hall, a women's prison in Lincolnshire. Broadly speaking, this is the direction in which the prison service should be headed - it's innovative, basically liberal and places more emphasis on rehabilitation than it does on punishment.  But if there is one pressing issue undermining the prison service - indeed, undermining all our claims to civilisation - it is inmate suicide. And this is a crucial problem in women's prisons. Sixty per cent more women killed themselves in 2003 than did in 2002, a year which had already marked an all-time high. Women constitute 5% of the prison population and 15% of its suicides. Non-fatal self-harming is a problem almost exclusively for female inmates.  And there are plenty of bodies and individuals prepared to comment damningly on the matter. But they all tend to concentrate on the mental condition of these prisoners, coupled with their often brutalised pasts. Claire McCarthy, for the Howard League for Penal Reform, said: "These women were mentally unstable and traumatised before they even got to prison." The Commission on Women and the Criminal Justice System published a report last November that controversially contended a link between female criminality and domestic and/or sexual violence, with either an abusive partner forcing the women into crime, or a history of abuse destabilising them from childhood.  Of course, these are all factors if we're looking to empathise with prisoners, but they put totally the wrong emphasis on the issue. For one, there is mental instability right across the prisoner population, regardless of gender - you could argue that cognitive disarray was the mainspring of criminality, since the rewards are so scant and the ramifications so far-reaching that you simply wouldn't do it, any of it, if you were fully tethered to a rational framework. For two, the implication, in focusing on the damage in these women's pasts, is that they simply don't have the mental resilience to cope with incarceration, in which case, well, it's a shame, but then you should have kept your nose clean, love. And, for three, there is another, far more important, practical reason for women to suffer more from imprisonment than men - the responsibility of childcare.  Some 55% of all women in prison have at least one child under 16. Over one-third have a child under five. When they're sentenced, they must make provision for these children, or see them taken into care, which not even the most flagrantly blasé authority would pretend is anything other than a developmental disaster. So, the burden falls on family members, and is rarely taken on by one constant household for the entire sentence, but rather patchworked together from a variety of people, in whom the mother might have fluctuating amounts of trust.  Prison privileges, the crucial carrot/stick business of institutional life, mainly centre around phone calls - and while for men this is about keeping in touch with the outside world, for the majority of women it's the scant and only control they have over their children's welfare. The stress is intolerable, and the difference in atmosphere between male and female prisons is acute and astonishing.  So, rather than experiment with part-time imprisonment for both men and women, let's try something else - let's not imprison mothers at all. There's nothing, after all, that we can do about abuse in the past; there's not much anyone can do about women who've been harassed into crime by domestic pressure. But we can do something about people being driven to suicide by anxiety over their children, and that's not lock them up in the first place.  For the 14% of female inmates who've been convicted of a violent crime, the case for incarceration could still be made, but for the overwhelming majority - the fraudsters, the thieves, the stolen-goods handlers, the drug-related offenders - what on Earth are they doing in prison, when the disruption of their absence is going to echo through generations?  Find another punishment; make them join a sewing circle. And, in the unlikely event that this new policy encourages feckless females to indulge in more crime, sod it. Over half the time, we're talking about theft or handling. And while it's hard to put a precise figure on how many thefts a human life is worth, it's quite a lot. It could be an infinite amount.  