Department of Health researchers have revealed the nine types of heavy drinker. Presumably they want us to stop drinking heavily, but when I see anything divided into types, I think of it more like a quiz. Confused about whether your self-harming behaviour is motivated by boredom, depression or a desire to conform? Let me walk you through it. I, by the way, have identified myself as a macho drinker. "Mostly men, of all ages, they do it to stand out from the crowd." You think I'm being facetious, but it does say "mostly" men, and I do drink to excess mainly to show off. So it gets me down to a tee. Tea? Ha! With whisky in it, mate. Etc, etc.  "De-stress drinkers" do it to regain control of life. "Conformist drinkers" seek structure and belonging, which sounds a bit like regaining control, but they are specifically manual and clerical workers, aged 45-59. "Boredom drinkers" drink to relieve the monotony of life. You can't really argue with that, can you? Like "depressed drinkers", your classic bored person can occupy any job or demographic. "Re-bonding drinkers" is the one that makes me want to take away the DoH's research budget and spend it, natürlich, on booze. Re-bonders are driven by a need to keep in touch with people who are close to them. It doesn't even make any sense. What's wrong with just talking to them? Are they wearing earplugs, these close people? "Community drinkers" are lower-middle-class men and women, who like to feel part of a group; not dissimilar to conformist drinkers, so far as I can make out, except a bit younger. There's clearly a rite-of-passage at age 44, where you stop wanting to belong and start wanting to conform. I wonder if we should be marking this event with, perhaps, a binge of drinking? "Hedonistic drinkers crave stimulation and want to abandon control." Like a macho drinker, except that according to the research they are probably divorced. Last but not least is the "border dependent", the person who drinks fast and often, daytime and evening. I can't help thinking ... apart from Methodists and children, doesn't this list describe just about the whole country?