It was a surreal sight. Weston Park, whose terraced gardens so impressed both Disraeli and P.G. Wodehouse, is pretty familiar to the Northern Ireland peace process. This is where Sinn Fein, the SDLP and the Unionists saved the Good Friday Agreement in sometimes icy hostility. Yet for three days last week, they were back in this 28-bedroom stately home almost as friends, offering advice and insights in the spacious orangery to beleaguered representatives of the Palestinian and Israeli peace movements.  As remarkable was that any Palestinians and Israelis were meeting in the same room. Avraham Burg, speaker of the Knesset, observed that at least part of the exercise, organised by The Observer 's sister paper, the Guardian , was to show Palestinians that there remained an Israeli peace party and to show Israelis that there remained a Palestinian peace party. But the guts of the three days of discussions were more practical. What are the key elements in successful peace processes ? How did you get them back on track when they break down? What can be done in the Middle East?  Northern Ireland and the Middle East do have parallels: deep-seated religious hatreds that mask systemic economic and social discrimination; a cycle of violence, death and retribution; irreconcilable differences over land and sovereignty. Indeed, as one of the Israeli delegation told me, Northern Ireland is, in some respects, worse. No future in the Middle East is going to demand that Israelis and Palestinians find sufficient agreement to live with each other in the same state. The curiously less ambitious outcome is that they find agreement over the terms of setting up a Palestinian state alongside Israel, easier than finding shared political institutions and processes within the same state for two warring sides.  Yet Northern Ireland has pulled it off pro tem. Incredibly, next year there will be the second elections for the Northern Ireland Assembly. Education Minister Martin McGuinness is in the full throes of examining the case for phasing out the 11+; both the policy and the ministerial sponsor were inconceivable five years ago. For the mainland British who have been used to thinking of Northern Ireland as being irredeemable, what has happened is now being held up as an example to the world.  The first step in any peace process, as McGuinness himself argued, is to accept that there will one day be a settlement, an explicit recognition by both sides that neither can get all they want and that the conflict is unwinnable in these absolutist terms. The main contours of any settlement are usually obvious, as they are in the Middle East; there, it is the creation of a Palestinian state, mutual recognition and a withdrawal of Israeli settlers from what must be Palestinian territory. If there is going to be a settlement, better try for it earlier than later, to avoid more misery.  The second step is to recognise that your opponents have got to deliver their constituency just as you have yours, and that means you have to empower them with concessions yourself. The third is that both sides need external partners who will broker progress, ensure guarantees are upheld and exact heavy penalties if they are not. The Northern Irish have acquired a deep and impressive wisdom.  If these are the preconditions to peace in the Middle East, then the prospects are bleak and where the parallels with Northern Ireland break down. Neither side has yet got to the stage where it believes the conflict is unwinnable. The Israelis palpably have no answer to suicide bombing, heartening and emboldening Palestinians who remain committed to their horrific efforts.  Equally, Israel indulges the expansion of Israeli settlements in the West Bank and Gaza, presumably because it believes the end game is the creation of a greater Israel. Religious justification is used on both sides to deepen the fanatics' belief that the conflict is winnable on their own terms.  Thus, the prospect of mutual empowerment is nil. The Israeli consensus is that any legitimate Palestinian leadership is one that renounces terrorism and recognises Israel and enforces this policy militarily. But this means that Israel can never enter dialogue with any Palestinian leadership which can deliver because it cannot bring its own constituency with it.  The paradox is that Israel needs the equivalent of Sinn Fein with whom to negotiate; politicians who have links with the terrorist organisations robust enough to deliver reduced violence or ceasefires. Sharon's policy of looking for puppet Palestinian and Arab leaders as 'partners in peace' is futile.  Nor is it clever to insist on ceasefires as a precondition for progress. As Yossi Beilin, former Israeli justice minister and the man behind the Oslo accords, wisely remarked, preconditions were unwise because they placed a veto in the hands of the extremists who could disrupt the process with one more terrorist act, a sentiment echoed by some Unionists who explained how the requirement for IRA decommissioning at one stage had threatened the whole peace process. But it is not Beilin who is making Israeli policy - more's the pity.  Then there is the international ele ment. The Northern Irish consistently stressed how important the engagement of Blair and Ahern had been, as was the role played by the US and EU in underwriting guarantees, offering independent observers, providing hard cash and insisting on penalties for acts of bad faith.  Again, the situation in the Middle East is different. A highly conservative US portraying Israel on the front line against the war on terrorism is hardly an impartial peace broker and, as the Palestinians argued and the Israelis agreed, the result has been an Israel which, after the Oslo accords were signed, has consistently reinterpreted them around Israeli preoccupations with no penalties.  But it was hard to leave Weston Park without feeling upbeat. There are prominent Israelis who know what needs to be done and that the dialogue with their Palestinian counterparts must be kept alive.  One day, new leadership on both sides, along with a more enlightened US, will tread the path blazed by the Irish and there will be a Palestinian state at peace, however uneasily, with Israel. But how much futile political posturing will be indulged and blood spilt before we get there?  