The Author of Himself: The Life of Marcel Reich-Ranicki<br />Marcel Reich-Ranicki<br />Weidenfeld &amp; Nicholson £25, pp405<br />Buy it at a 
discount at BOL To imagine a British Marcel Reich-Ranicki, you would have to pretend that Melvyn Bragg was an Irish Catholic whose family was murdered in cold blood by the British Army; that he was interned in Long Kesh, escaped and spied for the Soviet Union; that he defected to London after becoming a victim of the late Stalin purges and became the most influential literary critic in Britain, revered by housewives as much as professors for work of the seriousness of  In Our Time rather than  The South Bank Show.  The exercise is futile. A British Reich-Ranicki is an impossibility. He is a German phenomenon, who is not German.   Reich-Ranicki is the son of Polish Jews. He was born in 1920. His father was a hopeless businessman. 'If he had manufactured coffins,' said his wife, 'people would have stopped dying.' His mother's faith in the values of German culture was deep. When looting troops stole her wedding ring after the Nazi invasion of Poland, she was convinced that the outrage against good order would be rectified if she lodged an official complaint with the  Kommandatur. The family emigrated to Berlin after the Wall Street Crash and Reich-Ranicki proved he was his mother's son. He loses his virginity, finds love at first    sight in the Warsaw Ghetto, suffers persecution and sees his ambitions triumph with a chorus of German writers pounding out quotations in his mind. He says he is  The Author of Himself  because of his refusal to be classified by nationality or religion. But every page reveals how, contrary to postmodern theory, great authors can shape their readers.   His account of his Berlin schooldays and their aftermath are among the most touching sequences. Despite the incitements of the Hitler regime, his classmates and teachers treated him   with propriety; the abhorrence of vulgarity of the Prussian bourgeoisie prevented Jew-baiting. After the war, he attended a class reunion. Everyone was as polite as before. 'No one wanted to hear the details' of his torments in the Warsaw Ghetto. Good manners also meant knowing when to forget about unpleasantness.   None of the novelists he got to know after he returned to Germany in the Fifties asked about the extermination of Jewry. The first German to cross-examine him was a young, intense journalist he met in 1964 and rather liked - Ulrike Meinhof.   The publishers puff these memoirs as an 'unforgettable piece of Holocaust literature' and undoubtedly his descriptions of seeing his mother and father taken off to be murdered are devastating. I find the idea of a genre of 'Holocaust literature' as faintly exploitative   and false as heroin chic and was relieved to learn that Reich-Ranicki achieved a small victory over Hitler - he did not allow the Holocaust to dominate the rest of his life.   Reich-Ranicki and his wife escaped the Ghetto. He was hidden by a Polish working-class family. The Red Army swept the Germans out. He joined the Polish communists as an interpreter and then ran agents spying on free Poles in Britain from the London embassy. He was purged. He escaped to West Germany and, with remarkable speed, established himself as the pre-eminent   critic and interpreter of German literature on every available medium.   When his work as a Stalinist spy in the late Forties was revealed, by the son of his best friend, it caused a scandal. Reich-Ranicki shows few regrets. The doubts of his old age - he is 80 - are those of a critic worried about meretricious posturing and causing pain. How could he, as a young, rather ignorant music critic on the Warsaw Ghetto newspaper, 'hurt this or that musician' weeks before they were to be taken to the gas chamber? Why, when he could see Ingeborg Bachmann was dying, didn't he tell her her poems 'were among the most beautiful written in the German language this century?'   On his own account, many authors cannot stand him. He complains repeatedly of writers' egotism - all they want is praise and to talk about themselves - while showing very little   understanding of the egotism of the critic. He is perplexed when friends are infuriated by bad reviews. In 50 years of reviewing, he has not learned that you can be a good friend or you can be an honest critic, but you cannot be both.   The affection of readers is not in doubt. His autobiography has been top of the German bestsellers' list for more than a year. A Jew who voluntarily returned to Germany and upheld the republic's liberal values was probably always going to be celebrated. But, I think, his popularity owes much to an uncondescendingly serious tone. Reich-Ranicki's writing is accessible, but he does not indulge in insulting explanation of the 'William Shakespeare, the famous playwright from Stratford in Warwickshire' style that increasingly dominates British media. He assumes you understand his references. If you don't, you are flattered and inspired to look them up.   Not the smallest of reasons for buying his autobiography is that his extraordinary life and generous rigour could not happen here.