It doesn't seem to take much to pass for humour in Westminster. This is because they are ruminating to the very limits of their concentration, on matters of national importance, almost all the time. I imagine. Anyway, this is the "joke" still circulating - what have Julius Caesar and Charles Kennedy got in common? They both got stabbed in the back by men in sandals. I don't think Caesar was stabbed in the back. I think he was stabbed from the side, just below the throat. Jesus. I just called MPs humourless, and then went and said a thing like that. I wish I were dead.Meanwhile, Mark Oaten, who had recently thrown his hat into the Lib Dem leadership ring, was spotted in Savile Row. He needed a new hat. No, I'm sorry about that; he was buying shirts. An unnamed Labour "wag" remarked to an unnamed media pal that he should have been buying a beard and sandals.Now, here's the thing - beards have never been a liberal schtick. Not since the days when they were a foot long and everyone was a liberal unless they were a Whig or some sort of freak. Beards are a socialist thing. They date back to a time when people grew them for warmth, because they couldn't afford scarves. New Labour hates the beard, so far to the left is this facial furniture. The status of the sandal in wider life, for that matter, has totally changed, since the footwear first became associated with the liberal. Sandals are very fashionable, these days. Slinky, delicate ones are fashionable, and chunky, lentil-y ones are fashionable. In evidence, I offer the Birkenstock, which is so fashionable that Mr Birkenstock is engaged in legal proceedings against his ex-wife, Mrs Birkenstock, over who's allowed to call themselves "Birkenstock". To hear politicians insult one another in this way, through the conduit of fashion, is like listening to two people engage in a French slanging match, when neither of them speaks French.David Cameron, meanwhile, wowed the world with his special-edition Converse trainers. When we say "special edition", we don't mean an awful lot - they weren't radically expensive (50 squids; far less expensive than, say, a Savile Row hat), and not all that rare. But Will Smith wore some once, and the last Tory leader you can picture emulating Will Smith ... well, there's never been one. Although it's conceivable that Thatcher would have worn a long, black leather coat, and passed for Keanu Reeves.These Converse have caused an amazing storm. The Express is offering its readers a chance to win a pair, that they might look more like Cameron; media-wide, everyone is taking it as a sign of his groundbreaking modernity, even though when he speaks, it sounds like exactly the same amateurish, on-the-hoof carping that Michael Howard had down to such a tee. They do themselves an injustice, these politicos, when they harp on about clothing. They think it makes them sound more like us, more liable to be voted for by the fabled 16-24s who make the world go round. Instead, it makes them sound daft. It makes shoes sound daft. It's brought me very close to going out in my socks.