Leaving aside considerations of career, hair loss and ultimate power, frequently of life and death proportions, over sundry nations, who would you rather be? Tony Blair, who is now officially the Worst Briton in Britain? Or Iain Duncan Smith, who is only the 99th worst, beaten effortlessly by all the representatives of his own party that your average person could name, and safe in the knowledge that the only people in Britain less annoying than he is are the Atomic Kittens? It's a close call - if you're going to feature on such a list, it's good to be at the top, since it means people have heard of you. But in an ideal world, of course, your voting public wouldn't hate you at all - they would respect you,   like what they did in the olden days.  This poll is bad news all round for the government -people still reserve some venom for Peter Mandelson, who weighs in at number 49, substantially above Sting. It seems that no amount of sacking this man will make people forget about him. What do they want, blood? Even Lord Irvine of Lairg gets a look-in, and the sheer scale of research it takes to get from "that bloke with the wallpaper" to his correct title demonstrates the level of rancour he leaves in his wake.  There is also good news - there were only 100,000 respondents to the poll, and there was a slight bias in so far as they were all viewers of Channel 4. This makes it marginally less representative than local elections, and governments never take a blind bit of notice of those. Plus, there are myriad anomalies - while the Blairs warrant two separate entries (Cherie makes it to number 89), the Hamiltons appear as one single entity of pure badness (at number 19). If, therefore, Alastair Campbell (57) wanted to put a spin on this, he could take an average of the Blair-Booth axis (45), putting them on a par with Pete Waterman. Well, you wouldn't put it past him, which probably explains the fact that he himself has been deemed much more hateful than Alan Titchmarsh (who'd have thought?).  One further political insight offered by the poll is the strong case for an end to the monarchy - the Queen, apparently, is the 10th worst   Briton, and considering all she ever does is go on trips and break up the grinding tedium of Christmas eating, this seems a little harsh. Even low-profile and ex-royals get mentioned, although the significant absence of the Princes William and Harry does suggest that what the voters want is not so much an end to the royal family as an organised cull as soon as they hit 30. Like in that Jude Law film.   Otherwise, though, there is no real consistency to the list - people don't seem to like the inarticulate (Gareth Gates, 6), but nor do they like the articulate (Martin Bashir, 5). Chefs who lick their fingers the whole time irk (Nigella, 90); but so do the ones who can take or leave the licking   (Jamie Oliver, 28); as well as the ones who positively despise it (Delia, 78). Many of those featured also appeared on the 100 Best Britons, which highlights the already pretty obvious point that these are just the people we've heard of, and they can be either the best or the worst, depending on our mood.  Naturally, though, the poll has been used as an opportunity to trot out that old truism: the British hate success. Every development,    however minor, in popular culture, spawns this analysis - the Americans "really do enjoy having celebrities" (Terry Jones), they have a "whole notion of the American dream" (Sarah Dunant), whereas the British like to build people up just to knock them down, like to mock and carp, enjoy nothing more than watching Ali G gulling a politician or Princess Anne with a custard pie in her face. This is variously interpreted by media pundits as sophistication and healthy jaundice (if you see what I mean), and by politicians as cynicism and pessimism (Blair, in particular, is always "blasting cynicism". He has a knack of making politics sound like cheapo DIY. First, you blast the cynicism, then you can Artex the public services). It's time to lay this to rest - it is a   nonsense to claim that we hate success per se.  You will not find anyone on this list who has made a genuine and lasting contribution to life as we know it. There are no doctors or scientists; no academics, poets or composers; no trade union leaders, no charity bosses, no nurses, no inventors. There aren't even any dead people on it, since by the very act of being dead and still famous, they assert their long-term impact. The only artists who appear are better known as self-publicists, and the only novelist is also a journalist (ahem). We don't hate success at all; we just hate people who make a lot of noise, for no great reason, particularly first thing in the morning. Is that so wrong?