I know your New Year's Day will not be complete until you have heard my predictions for 2006, so let me put you out of your misery. David Cameron's bubble will burst when the public realises he's a PR man flogging a shabby brand. Tony Blair will stay Prime Minister after a crash in the property market triggers a classic deflationary spiral that shreds Gordon Brown's reputation for fiscal competence.There will be a few jolly diversions from mass unemployment. Margaret Drabble and the Archbishop of Canterbury will stun literary London and the General Synod of the Church of England when they appear on I'm a Celebrity... In sport, Laughing Boy will delight the bookies when he comes in at 100-1 to win the Cheltenham Gold Cup. Meanwhile in America, Congress will impeach George W Bush after he...I could go on. As I write, I'm aware that all around me, my colleagues are going on. Read the comment pages of the newspapers or listen to radio presenters giving soft interviews to their fellow journalists and a fair chunk of what you will get is Mystic Meggery. It is hard enough to find out what has happened or is happening, and yet a cocksure media devote an unwarranted amount of time to announcing what will happen.We are not alone. Interest rates and fiscal policy are determined by the Bank of England's and Treasury's economic forecasts. Clairvoyants in the City direct their investors' money to companies that are themselves predicting what new lines will sell. The lives of British troops depend on predictions of the likely behaviour of Baathist and al-Qaeda terrorists. Forecasting is the motor which drives politics, economics, foreign policy and industry, while our private happiness can be determined by predictions on whether he or she will say 'yes' if we ask for a date.The mania for prophesy is easy to explain. You have to make guesses about the future to know what to do in the present. The same magical status the Romans gave the keepers of the sacred chickens goes to those who make a career out of it, so there is a strong incentive to pretend you have second sight.But here is something harder to understand. I know a lot about British politics and have only a passing interest in racing. The odds are, however, that I am more likely to get the winner of the Gold Cup right than foresee who will be in Downing Street next Christmas. Actually, it could be worse than that. My political predictions may be more reliable if I made random guesses than if I sat down and drew on my expertise.I can at least foretell my failings with confidence because of a remarkable study by Professor Philip E Tetlock of Berkeley University in California. Expert Political Judgment has been 20 years in the making. He began work in the Cold War when the future of the human race depended on predictions about how the Soviet Union would behave. Liberals lambasted Ronald Reagan for upping the pressure on the communists and warned that his arms race would lead to nuclear annihilation.Not so, as it turned out. Soviet power collapsed. Conservative hawks would have had every right to be satisfied had they not completely failed to predict the collapse of the Soviet Union because they refused to take Mikhail Gorbachov's reforms seriously.Tetlock finished his work during the Iraq crisis in which intelligence agencies failed to predict that Saddam had no weapons of mass destruction worthy of the name. Liberal doves would have had every reason to be satisfied had not they completely failed to predict the success of the Iraqi elections.Over the decades in between, 284 experts in academia, government, think tanks and the media helped by giving him 83,361 forecasts not only on the future of the Soviet Union and American policy in the Gulf, but also on dozens of other public policy issues. They covered everything from the likelihood of Pakistan and North Korea obtaining nuclear weapons to whether Aids or refugee movements would create a humanitarian crisis; from how technology firms would perform in the dotcom bubble to whether countries would abide by their Kyoto commitments to limit greenhouse gases.Tetlock's research reached a blunt conclusion. A chimpanzee throwing darts at a dartboard with a selection of answers pinned to it was more likely to get it right than an eminent professor or distinguished pundit. Indeed, the more eminent the experts, the more likely they were to be wrong. Knowing a little was often better than knowing a lot, and specialisation in the minutiae of a subject was subject to the law of diminishing returns. Because experts invested so much energy in attaining knowledge, they could not accept thoughts that contradicted what they had learnt and staked their reputations on.To prove his point, Tetlock tells the story of students at Yale who had to guess where a laboratory rat would find food in maze. The rat won by a comfortable margin because the answer was stupidly simple. Pride handicapped the humans. The setters of their test made sure that none of the complicated mathematical formulas they had acquired could explain where the food was likely to be.The worst forecasters were those who appeared most often in the media. As anyone who has been on television knows, it fosters a manic egotism. Otherwise well-balanced people are filled with bombastic certainty - 'David Cameron's bubble will burst' - and make spectacular forecasts that please the producers by grabbing the attention of channel-hopping viewers - 'the property market will crash', 'the Archbishop of Canterbury will appear on I'm a Celebrity'.Beyond egotism and pride lies political bias. People who hated Ronald Reagan and George W Bush predicted their policies would lead to disaster, just as those who hated the Soviet Union and Baathist Iraq predicted that all would be well. I think that submerged bias explains the popularity of prophesy among civil servants, academics and broadcasters. They have professional obligations to be neutral. They can get round them by pretending to be time travellers who go to the future and impartially report on the calamities that will befall the world if their partisan views are ignored.Tetlock dismisses the comforting notion that public life is 'a marketplace of ideas', in which the peddlers of daft predictions are exposed as frauds or fools. The market does not work because large parts of the audience want comfort rather than truth. For instance, I have a deep and just possibly irrational dislike of PRs - and Tories, now I come to think of it. Those among you who share it won't turn on me if David Cameron is a winner. On the contrary, you might well turn on me if I accurately predict that he will be Prime Minister in 2009.The above makes Tetlock sound like a bog-standard postmodernist who believes that there is no possibility of finding objective truth. He hasn't ended up in the mire of relativism because, among his experts, was a minority whose predictions were good. In Isaiah Berlin's division of intellectuals between the darting foxes who 'know many little things' and the solid ideological hedgehogs who 'know one big thing well', Tetlock says the foxes won hands down.Like a stopped clock, the ideologues may occasionally be right, and the foxes could end up baffled if they darted about too frantically. Overall, however, it was forecasters who drew 'from an eclectic array of traditions and accepted ambiguity and contradiction as inevitable features of life' who performed well.With lives and livelihoods at stake, his findings are worth noticing. Tetlock offers three pieces of advice to politicians and others who must decide if a prediction is likely to be true. First, civil servants, academics, spies and - may the Good Lord protect and preserve us - journalists should be judged by the accuracy of their previous forecasts. Second, an audience should ask itself how well a prophet's beliefs reflect observable reality. Finally, it should check that the prophet updates his or her beliefs in response to new evidence.His last recommendation is the most important in my view. 'When the facts change, I change my mind,' said JM Keynes. My only good piece of advice for 2006 is you shouldn't listen to those who don't.