The scandal of the moment is that Sir Mark Thatcher was arrested in Cape Town and is helping police with their inquiries into allegations that he helped finance a plot to overthrow the dictator of a miserable West African state which has no obvious attractions to the sons of Tory leaders other than enormous oil reserves. Among the alleged co-conspirators are Simon Mann, a mercenary and an old boy of Eton, Sandhurst and the SAS; David Hart, another old Etonian and one of the most ruthless operators of the Thatcher years; and Ely Calil, a British-based Lebanese tycoon who makes his money from the West African oil trade.  As The Observer reported, Peter Mandelson, twice-sacked minister and EU commissioner, rented a flat from Calil. It was in Holland Park, a part of London so expensive I don't need to waste time describing where it is because you can never afford to live there.  Mandelson had been forced to move to Calil's apartment after the press revealed that he had used a private loan from a fellow minister, Geoffrey Robinson, to buy his previous home in Notting Hill, another part of London you may as well forget about. Mandelson and the Lebanese oil baron have a common friend in James Palumbo, the upper-class owner of the Ministry of Sound who made tens of millions by slumming it in the pop business.  While Mandelson was in Holland Park, he was forced to offer one of his many resignations after he was accused of lobbying on behalf of the billionaire Hinduja brothers, who were at the time up to their necks in the biggest arms scandal in the history of independent India.  No one suggests that Mandelson has anything to do with the alleged African conspiracy. What's telling is that he has been mixing with very rich men, be they the friends of the Thatcher family, sprigs of the Palumbo family or the brothers from the Hinduja family. These are odd circles to find a Labour minister in. Let me put it to Labour readers like this: if you were invited to these people's parties, would you want to go?  The scandal before the last scandal was the gossip about David Blunkett's love life. If he had behaved like a decent Labour politician and had an affair with the chairwoman of his constituency's Unison branch, it would have been a private matter. But after so many years of stealing Tory policies, New Labour has moved on to stealing Tory wives.  His liaison was with Kimberly Fortier, the American publisher of the right-wing  Spectator . Fortier set up home in Britain with her husband, the publisher of Vogue, in a £2 million town house in Mayfair, yet another of those central London districts you can't afford to think about. Blunkett had a romantic retreat on the Chatsworth estate of Deborah 'Debo' Mitford, the dowager Duchess of Devonshire, who, I should add in mitigation, was one of the few Mitford sisters who wasn't actually a Nazi.  Again there is a jolting sense of dislocation. Blunkett constantly plays the prolier-than-thou card against anyone who questions his attacks on civil liberties. His opponents are Hampstead bleeding-hearts, he bellows. Guardian -reading girls' blouses who don't know what hard men forged in the furnaces of Sheffield must do to clear the mean streets of crime.  But when his day's work is over, he dismisses bourgeois Hampstead as too common for his refined tastes and heads up-market to the aristocratic attractions of Mayfair and Chatsworth; to parties at the Spectator and dinners with Barbara Amiel. He shows no signs of worry that the company he keeps may mark him as a stonking humbug.  Before the last two scandals, there was the one about Tony Blair choosing to accept a free holiday from Silvio Berlusconi, a billionaire who has bought the Italian media and politics as a job lot. Before that there were Lakshmi Mittal, Enron, Arthur Andersen, Ecclestone.  The common thread is money: old money, new money, funny money - and the peculiar individuals who get and spend it. You had better get used to seeing politicians partying with money in all its guises. Learning to love the rich may soon become the only way for politicians to survive.  Last week the Electoral Commission released its latest report on party political funding. Quite rightly there was a great deal of interest in the coincidence of Paul Drayson, a biotechnology entrepreneur, giving £500,000 to New Labour six weeks after New Labour made him a life peer.  But focusing on the details of one case misses the wider trend: British public life is increasingly dependent on the grace and favour of the super-rich. Such has been the accumulation of wealth at the top, the parties no longer have a financial need for mass memberships. Dr Peter Facey, director of the New Politics Network, a think-tank which monitors the cash flows, adds that for all the talk of the corporate takeover of government, they don't need corporations' money either. Donations from big business have, in fact, all but disappeared. The rich are now so rich they no longer have to go to the trouble of persuading directors and shareholders to authorise a payment from company funds when they can pay it from the petty cash.  In the last three months of 2003, for instance, Labour received £4.1 million. About £1.85m came from its traditional source, the trade unions, which can't donate without the approval of their members. The union contribution was matched by the personal presents of three men - Sir Christopher Ondaatje CBE, Lord Paul Hamlyn and William Haughey OBE - who gave £1.83m between them. Sir Christopher alone handed over £1m.  Donations of this size aren't always dubious. Try as the media might, we haven't been able to find anyone with a bad word to say about Ondaatje. He's just a rich man who thinks that Tony Blair is an excellent Prime Minister and wants to help him fight elections.  But you don't have to go back into the dealings around Ecclestone, Mittal and the rest to realise that the overall effect of the rise of the plutocracy is pernicious, even when it manifests itself in the amiable form of Ondaatje.  Last week's figures showed that the UK Independence Party received more money than the Liberal Democrats in the run-up to June's European elections.  Its good fortune wasn't the result of a surge in membership, but because a Yorkshire businessman, Paul Sykes, gave Ukip £715,000.  Suppose that as well as hating Europe, Sykes despised gays and loathed fox hunters. Would Ukip's leaders and members dare risk losing his money by drawing-up a manifesto which was for homosexual equality and for fox hunting? Maybe they would, but it isn't over-cynical to believe Sykes has bought himself a party which would never dare cross him.  It isn't just Ukip. Iain Duncan Smith's fate was sealed when Stuart Wheeler, the Conservative's biggest donor, said he wouldn't give a penny more to the party. When Duncan Smith was duly fired and Howard took over, the spread-betting tycoon opened his wallet and gave another £500,000. The Tories are no longer dependent on the support of business as a whole, but of one businessman, Wheeler, and a handful of like-minded tycoons.  Think of how many raffles and discos ordinary party members would have to organise to raise Wheeler's £500,000, Sykes' £715,000 or Ondaatje's £1m.  The result is a vicious circle. The big donors' big cheques go to the parties' headquarters in London. They strengthen the power of the centre, weaken local workers and fuel public suspicion of influence peddling. Party members sense their irrelevance. They drop out of politics and leave their parties more dependent on the big cheques from the big donors.  Next month the Electoral Commission will offer its proposals for reform. I hope they suggest cutting the cost of politics by banning billboard advertising and offering all kinds of incentives to politicians to seek small donations from ordinary citizens. I hope they're ruthlessly radical because at the moment we're looking at a future where public life will inevitably be run by an ever-shrinking coterie.  The Mandelsons and the Blunketts hang around the rich because they want to. Their successors may hang around the rich because they have to.