Every summer the graduates of Britain's universities decide what to do with their lives. As in previous years, thousands will have rejected the ideals of public service and the excitement of setting-up their own businesses and decided instead to fill the gaps in the ranks of Britain's 250,000 accountants.Britain has as many as the rest of the EU put together, and it's easy to see why. There's no state-guaranteed monopoly for engineers, factory workers, call-centre girls, small businessmen or women, computer programmers, inventors or any other wealth-creating trade. Indeed, when the working population's jobs head east they are told in thunderous voices that their sloth is being deservedly punished by the wrathful gods of the marketplace. But auditing can't go east. Every institution in Britain has to have its books audited by a member of one of the British accountancy associations.In theory they are the police officers of finance, forever on the lookout fraud and gross incompetence. In practice they differ from the police in one respect. Detectives are not allowed to sell 'extra services' to potential criminals. They might think twice before breaking up an international cocaine-smuggling racket if their force relied on that same ring for a large slice of its income. No similar pettifogging concerns about conflicts of interest constrain the accountancy racket. Accountants are free to sell advice on how to install IT or avoid taxes to the very managers they are meant to be policing on behalf of pension funds and employees. If they blow the whistle, they might lose the contracts, so the whistle has a tendency to stay in the pocket.  It shouldn't be a surprise to learn that British accountants make a comfortable living.  Management Today found that the average annual pay packet of British accountants in 2001 came to $117,000 (£82,000), which was way ahead of their nearest rivals in Europe, the Swiss, who struggled to get by on $73,000 (£51,000).  Thrusting graduates have always aimed to hack their way to the top of one of the 'Big Four' accountancy firms - PricewaterhouseCoopers, Ernst &amp; Young, KPMG or Deloitte - which dominate the global and British markets. The most ambitious will hope one day to emulate Mike Rake, the head of KPMG, who last year received a 45 per cent pay rise to take his salary to £2.4 million.  'What do you spend it on?' a reporter from the Sunday Times asked. 'Sixteen polo ponies,' Rake replied.In the past, Rake and his colleagues were partners who had unlimited liability for their partnership's debts. Like the Lloyd's names, they put everything they owned on the line, and their exposure must have caused the odd sleepless nights. Auditors had approved the accounts of Robert Maxwell, Polly Peck, the Bank of Credit and Commerce International, Enron, WorldCom, Equitable Life and many another grotesquely mismanaged company. Until New Labour came to power the threat that Rake and his fellow partners might be sued for presiding over a disaster should have troubled even the self-confident head of KPMG. Everything, the pied--terre in London, the home in Henley-on-Thames, the villa in Spain and the 16 polo ponies, could have gone.  The example of Arthur Andersen provided a terrible warning. The Big Four were once the Big Five until Andersen approved the accounts of Enron and WorldCom and earned the imperishable distinction of failing to notice that the first and second biggest frauds in human history were going on under its nose. Andersen went bust because, understandably, no reputable organisation would go near it. The Bush administration reacted by making it all but impossible for auditors to sell other services to clients in the United States. What if Parliament was to enforce the same regulations here?  If Enron wasn't bad enough, what of the policy holders of Equitable Life who are suing Ernst &amp; Young for several billion for their failure to warn that the mutual was heading towards a financial calamity?  I don't know if Rake suffers from panic attacks. If he does, he will at least be able to reassure himself on one point: however calamitously the accountancy giants audit British business, his polo ponies will be safe. As this column has noted before, the most striking vice of New Labour is not its friendship with business - all modern governments have to make friends with business - but its anxiety to acquaint itself with the most notorious capitalists: the Mittals, the Hindujas, the Murdochs and, now I think of it, the Arthur Andersens. The Tories had banned Andersen from receiving government contracts after its perennially myopic auditors had failed to spot that tax-payers money was disappearing by the boot load from the DeLorean car plant in Belfast.  Andersen responded by sucking-up to New Labour and waiting for a change of regime. Patricia Hewitt was hired by its consulting arm. Andersen's services were offered free of charge to Labour when it was in Opposition. When Tony Blair won the 1997 election, the unpleasantness about DeLorean was tidied away and government contracts began to flow Andersen's way again. In 2000, the government bowed to a long campaign by the accountancy giants and limited their liability. Partners could protect themselves by changing their partnership into a limited company. Better still, they could still be partners and retain all the tax advantages and freedom from public scrutiny partnerships brought until they were successfully sued - when they would be able to claim the immunities of the directors of limited companies. The personal assets of the partners - the pads in Chelsea, the piles in the Chilterns - couldn't be seized by bailiffs whatever alternative they choose.  The old wisdom about never giving into bullies has held true. The Big Four weren't satisfied with the government's gracious treatment and upped their demands. With personal liability gone, they now want a cap on the damages their firms can be required to pay for negligence or fraud. If they don't get it, they warn that one of their number could go bust. The Big Four would become the Big Three and the group would offer an even less competitive service to the business world. As Rake put it, business 'can't afford to lose another accountancy firm'.  From inside the City the apparently outrageous demand for benefit of the clergy for accountants makes a kind of sense. What, after all, are the Big Four worth? Their offices in central London should be fetch a fair price, and photocopiers, computer terminals and the rest. But what was the main asset, the unlimited liability of the partners to meet debts, was removed by an obliging Labour government. A successful action by Equitable Life against Ernst &amp; Young could close it down because Ernst &amp; Young may no longer have the assets to redress the claims of the victims of its alleged ineptitude.Needless to say, Patricia Hewitt's Department of Trade and Industry has been convinced and is all for going along with the Big Four's demands for lame duck accountants to be protected as an endangered species.  But the rest of us may wonder that if claims for damages against accountancy firms can be capped, why shouldn't claims against any other business capped? Or claims against trade unions? Or hospitals? Or you? Or me? What incentive will there be for auditors to improve on their lamentable record if they receive fresh privileges? If they are hired by another Maxwell, why should they be any more concerned now about protecting pensioners from penury than they were in the 1980s?These columns normally end with a lament about the general worthlessness of New Labour's unprincipled ninnies. But for once there's a faint whiff of hope in the air. Last week the Office of Fair Trading said words to the effect that the Big Four should stop taking the mickey. Meanwhile institutional investors are lobbying against auditors being placed beyond the full reach of the law. According to rumour, they've been joined by Gordon Brown's Treasury.  If the rumour is true, then delegates preparing for the Labour Party Conference should consider asking the Chancellor to overcome his notorious politeness and put Ms Hewitt in her place. The Labour Party wasn't founded to create a Milton Friedman world of socialism for the rich and capitalism for the poor; where Mike Rake keeps his polo ponies while savers with Equitable Life lose their pensions.