As the stock market crash makes comparisons with 1929 seem too plausible for comfort, the Government has acted decisively. It doesn't want to protect the owners of pensions and endowments, who have seen their savings slashed. Rather, it wants to shield the 'Big Four' accountancy conglomerates, which presided over the frauds and manias of the speculative bubble, from the consequences of their actions. A few weeks ago, Patricia Hewitt slipped out a remarkable parliamentary answer. The Government was considering sheltering auditors from being sued for negligence, she said. The details had yet to be sorted out, but a review of company law would limit auditors' liability.  Accountancy Age added that Hewitt had capitulated after a lobbying campaign by the Big Four - PricewaterhouseCoopers, KPMG, Deloitte &amp; Touche and Ernst &amp; Young - had 'won sympathy' in Whitehall. A cap of somewhere between £100 million and £200m on their liability was on the way.  It is perhaps worth pausing to consider how impervious the political class is to a world it no longer understands. Like all bubbles, the 'New Economy' dementia of the late 1990s was powered by the perverse belief that it was profitable to buy dotcom and telecom shares, even when you knew their long-term value was likely to be nothing. But, as the collapse of Enron and WorldCom showed, fraud played its part in whacking up the price of worthless companies.  Arthur Andersen was the auditor in both cases. By a weird coincidence, Hewitt was employed by Andersen before New Labour came to power. She won't be able to go back there when she's finally thrown out of politics - robbed American investors have sued Andersen out of existence.  However, she can still help the rest of the City. Even before she announced she would grant accountants privileges not available to other institutions, Hewitt had made it clear that she wouldn't tackle the brazen conflict of interest at the heart of auditing.  Because auditors can sell valuable ser vices to companies, including advice on how to dodge the taxes the rest of us must pay, they have a compelling incentive to keep senior managers sweet by failing to alert the public to crime in the boardroom.  Investigations into the corporations at the heart of the crash have shown that turning a blind eye to fraud wasn't a one-off offence committed by lightheaded auditors in the madness of the late 1990s: it was a systemic policy.  As early as 1987, dealers in Enron's New York office were betting on the future price of oil without protecting themselves with hedges in case their gambles backfired. They also set up shell corporations in Panama. These created phantom deals which impressed Wall Street and produced healthy earnings for Enron, on paper at any rate. Large bonuses flowed to the traders in recognition of their good work.  The managers in Houston didn't realise that the deals were phony, but did notice that company money was disappearing into the traders' pockets. Kenneth Lay, the Enron boss, refused to fire his thieving employees. 'I have decided not to terminate these people,' he said. 'I need their earnings.' The traders stayed on and committed Enron to supplying tens of millions of barrels of oil it didn't have. The company was stuck in an unsustainable position. If its rivals had found out, they could have wrecked Enron by forcing up prices.  With luck and phenomenal bluffing, the management escaped bankruptcy by a whisker, although it was compelled to make an $85m charge against earnings in 1987. Far from learning caution from the near-death experience, Lay learned that the paper profits which impressed shareholders and bankers could be inflated or, let's face it, invented. He avoided the unpleasantness calling in the police would have brought.  An Enron accountant who saw Lay stick by his crooked colleagues told Vanity Fair : 'It was obvious to us and to Arthur Andersen that [the traders] had opened fraudulent bank accounts, and we felt that they were going to con tinue to manipulate transactions.' Lay wasn't bothered. He was 'a guy who put earnings before scruples rather than reacting to the dishonesty right in front of him'.  One of the reasons why your investments keep going down is that auditors didn't nip fraud in the bud. If they had, the fees from other services, and the possibility of switching jobs and joining the firms they were meant to police, would have disappeared.  They don't need to worry about serving the public interest by doing their work honestly. Their sole fear is they may join Arthur Andersen in the corporate graveyard if investors sue them for gross negligence.  Hewitt is determined to save them from that terrible fate and, in doing so, is proving that New Labour is well to the Right of the Tories and the Bush administration.  You can't turn on the radio without hearing wails about the compensation culture. Lawyers shake billions out of the NHS each year and government departments are punished for insisting that civil servants should have the good manners to be tidily dressed when they meet the unemployed.  Hewitt won't limit their liability. The nearest she can come to a justification for giving benefit of clergy to the City is that there will be a cartel if another accounting giant is destroyed by its crimes. She ignores the fact that the Big Four already is a cartel.  A reputable system of financial management would require it to be broken up by ending the accounting conglomerates' conflict of interest. If auditors were banned from selling extras to managers, the firms would have to be split into separate auditing and financial services companies.  Rather than tackle a quasi-monopoly, Hewitt is strengthening it. In the United States, the regulators at the Securities and Exchange Commission have already rejected attempts by British accountants to limit their liability for false statements. Investors who believed what the Big Four said were entitled to sue if the accounts turned out be fraudulent or misleading.  Even Bush's corporate-powered America has its limits, it seems. In Britain, there are none.  The accountancy cartel badgered Ministers for years to grant it the favour of capping its liabilities. Prem Sikka, professor of accountancy at Essex University, said it lobbied the Tories, but found that they were a tougher proposition than New Labour.  In 1996, the Law Commission said: 'We can find no principled arguments for a "capping" system... it cuts across a principle that a wrongdoer should compensate the plaintiff for loss.' So it does. And with so many people facing such large losses, you do have to wonder why the Government is desperate to protect the profession which helped get us into this mess in the first place.   <B>It is not only David Irving who denies the Holocaust</B>The ease with which 'a racist, a Holocaust denier and a falsifier of history' can prevent the public reading books which expose him as a racist, a Holocaust denier and a falsifier of history continues to be a wonder of the English libel law.  Last year, I reported on the strange career of Telling Lies About Hitler by Richard J. Evans. The professor of modern history at Cambridge University had produced an account of the libel action David Irving brought against Penguin Books and Deborah Lipstadt, the author of Denying the Holocaust. Irving's attempt to ban the book and win a fortune in damages was a crushing failure. Mr Justice Gray ruled that he was a racist, a Holocaust denier and so on.  The way appeared clear for readers to learn how fraudulent history prospered. Among the many lies Evans dissected was how Irving inflated the death toll from the RAF's bombing of Dresden tenfold 30 years ago. The fake figure is quoted to this day.  Four publishers promised to produce the detective story, but pulled out for fear that Irving would sue. Their terror was absurd. What little reputation Irving had before the trial was destroyed by the judgment. He can't sue because he has no reputation to lose.  The mere threat of a libel action was enough, however, to turn the fine liberals of literary London into censors. The story seemed to have a happy ending when Verso, a small Left-wing house agreed to release the book. Six thousand copies were sold, and you can still buy it in good book shops.  But not on amazon.co.uk. The online dealer boasts that it provides 1.5 million titles. Nazi works are among them. Yet Amazon has dropped Evans's attack on a man who fabricated in the Nazi interest.  As it stands, the law of libel allows booksellers to be sued, as well as publishers and authors. It's as if telephone companies could be taken to court for slanders that their phone lines carry.  Given this authoritarian provision, I would have a touch of sympathy for Amazon if it hadn't told Professor Evans's publishers that it put the protection of its shareholders' wallets before freedom of speech and freedom of publication.