At the beginning of the Second World War, George Orwell gave the young Christopher Hill a stinking review of the sort that no author forgives or forgets. Writing in the New Statesman, Orwell tore into the historian who was to become a great and generous interpreter of seventeenth-century English radicalism - and Master of Balliol to boot. Hill's best work was to come. In 1940 Orwell's fury was provoked by his juvenilia, The English Revolution: 1640, a book with a fair claim to be the most simplistic Marxist version of history published in Britain in the twentieth century. Orwell identified a persistent fault of the far Left. Like those who give a knowing wink and insist that the war against Iraq is 'all about oil,' Hill and his comrades were too 'cocksure'. They wrote off 'religion, morality, patriotism [as] a sort of hypocritical cover-up for the pursuit of economic interest' when they insisted that the Parliamentarians' war against Charles I could be reduced to a battle between the rising class of capitalists and the dead weight of the feudal monarchy.  'A "Marxist" analysis of any historical event tends to be a hurried snap judgment based on the principle of cui bono?, something rather like the "realism" of the saloon-bar cynic who always  assumes the bishop is keeping a mistress and the trade union leader is in the pay of the boss,' Orwell continued.  Such reasoning was a hopeless guide. 'Long after Hitler came to power official Marxism was declaring that Hitler was of no importance and could achieve nothing. On the other hand, people who had hardly heard of Marx but who knew the power of faith had seen Hitler coming years earlier.'  Hill was buried on Friday. Before his body was cold, Anthony Glees of Brunel University and the  Times went way beyond the charge that he was once a supporter of Communist orthodoxy and apologist for Stalin's crimes. 'Was Oxford's most famous Marxist a Soviet mole?' asked Wednesday's Times. With Glees's help, it answered its rhetorical question with a triumphant 'Yes.'  Hill had hidden his Communism and tunnelled his way to the Russian desk at the Foreign Office during the war. He had suggested that white Russian emigrs should be purged from British uni  versities. He formed a friendship with Peter Smollett, head of the Russian desk at the Ministry of Information and an acquaintance of Kim Philby. Before fleeing to the Soviet Union, Smollett performed many small services for Stalin, including persuading several publishers to turn down Orwell's Animal Farm.   When I talked to Glees, he said Hill had been 'sinister and disgraceful.' His research proved that Hill was a Soviet agent in the Foreign Office, and a demoralised Hill had come to his home in 1983 and admitted that he was guilty as charged. Glees went on to wonder whether Balliol should go through its records and discover what Hill had been up to when he was Master. The apparently fair and kind scholar may well have promoted left-wing students in the 1960s and 1970s while obstructing the careers of Conservative undergraduates. Glees would not go on the record and name the beneficiaries of Hill's patronage, but he had his suspicions.  Stalinism is in the air, and not only because it is the 50th anniversary of the old bastard's death. In Saddam Hussein, Iraq has a tyrant who models himself on Stalin. He has followed to the letter Stalin's policy of killing rivals before they are a threat - even before they know themselves that they might one day be rivals strong enough to pose a threat. (This tactic alone explains why it is difficult to think of a way other than invasion to get rid off him.)  Yet virtually everyone I meet doesn't want to hear about Saddam's crimes or read the fraternal requests for support from democrats and socialists in the Iraqi opposition. Like the Left of the 1930s, they put their hands over their ears and scream whenever either subject is mentioned. Just as the greater cause of anti-fascism led decent people to turn a blind eye to Stalin's crimes in the 1930s, so the often silly cause of anti-Americanism leads decent people to turn a blind eye to the plight of the Iraqis.  You didn't need to know too much about the dark side of the Left to shudder and think 'Oh no, not again' when Tony Benn flew to Baghdad and played straight guy to a monster with the blood of hundreds of thousands on his hands. (Benn: 'I wondered if you would say something direct to the peace movement that might help advance the cause they have had in mind.' Saddam: 'We pray to God to empower all those working against war and for the cause of peace.') Benn's subsequent insulting of an Iraqi woman in London as a 'CIA stooge' made the comparison perfect. Reports from Stalin's death camps were dismissed as fabrications of the capitalist press in the 1933: the cries of Saddam's victims are dismissed as CIA 2003 propaganda.  Many in the anti-war movement don't bother to hide their nostalgia. George Galloway, an MP whose pain all sensitive souls must share when Saddam is taken out, was asked last year if he would describe himself as a Stalinist. 'If you are asking did I support the Soviet Union, yes,' Galloway replied. 'The disappearance of the Soviet Union is the biggest catastrophe of my life.'  A neat theory is available. The new Left is repeating the crimes of the old. What Christopher Hill began, others are determined to finish. It doesn't work - in Hill's case at least.  Hill would not have liked Orwell's review, but on one point he wouldn't have quibbled. When Orwell said that Hill was a spokesman for 'official Marxism' - that is, that he was a Communist - Hill would have agreed. Of course he was. His books were issued by Lawrence &amp; Wishart, the Communist Party's publishers, and followed the party line.  Real moles hide everything. They last thing they would do is send out Communist tracts to be reviewed in the New Statesman by hostile critics who would point out their Communism as a matter of course. When Philby was recruited in the mid-1930s, his Russian handlers instructed him to drop his left-wing politics. He was to catch the eye of MI6 by pretending to hold the views of the establishment. In the 1930s, respectability came by posing as a quiet admirer of Nazi Germany, editing the journal of the Anglo-German Fellowship and joining the staff of the Times,  a paper as slavish towards Adolf Hitler then as it is towards Rupert Murdoch now.  I can't prove that Hill is innocent of the charge of treason, and Smollett undoubtedly was a Soviet agent. But the Soviet Union would have been remarkably foolish if it had recruited Hill, and MI5 even more foolish if it had failed to spot the agent. It is no defence of what Hill believed to say that his Stalin-worship was respectable in the 1940s. The establishment became pro-Soviet when the Soviet Union became Britain's ally in the Second World War. The Times switched from admiring Hitler to admiring Stalin. The British government sent Russians who had fought with Hitler to die in Stalin's death camps. Among the publishers who turned down  Animal Farm  for fear of offending Stalin was T.S. Eliot, who has yet to be accused of being a Communist spy - although anything is possible at the moment.  Hill never gave up his Marxism, but left the Communist party in 1957. He went on to rescue the histories of the Levellers, Diggers, Ranters and Fifth Monarchists from obscurity. More than any other historian in the twentieth century, he showed how ordinary people developed ideas of democracy, socialism, secularism and women's emancipation as soon as civil war destroyed censorship and political control and allowed them the space to think and argue.  The most moderate of the radical groups were the Levellers. All they wanted was democracy. But 350 years on Tony Blair behaves with the arrogance of a Stuart king and refuses to countenance the thought that the voters should be free to send their representatives to the House of Lords.  Because the 'good old cause' of the seventeenth-century radicals is still unfulfilled, the ideas that the old Master of Balliol revived will survive long after the Saddams and Galloways are gone.