In the interval between the war against terrorism and the war against Iraq, we've had to find what diversions we can in the collapse of global capitalism and unchecked political corruption and religious mania. The following questions are meant to test your attention levels. A score of fewer than 5 means, I'm afraid, that you are banned from reading  The Observer and sentenced to listen to  The Moral Maze for the rest of your life. Ten or higher is more than creditable. The only possible way to get full marks is to have your paper marked by an A-Level exam board.  <B>The Age of Miracles</B> 1 Which company chairman bankrolled Republicans, Democrats, Blairites and Tories and then told the  San Diego Union-Tribune : 'I believe in God and I believe in free markets... Jesus was a freedom lover, he wanted people to have the freedom to make choices'?  2 Did he really add that he expected to go to heaven because God would see 'my total life as a businessman, the way I treated people, the opportunities I've created for people and the standards of living that have been impacted for the better'?  3 According to Jack Temple, Cherie Blair's 'homeopathic dowser healer', the leaves of which plant allow 'the lame to walk, the barren to conceive and the sad to smile' if, and only if, they capture the healing energies of the stars by being planted within the boundaries of his allegedly neolithic stone circle at West Byfleet near Woking?  4 With Christmas over many readers will be planning to imitate the Blairs by visiting the fake Aztec pyramid in the grounds of the Mamora Hotel on Mexico's Caribbean coast. After you and your companion have stripped down to your swimming costumes and gazed on the shapes of phantom animals in the steam, what should you smear each other with before emitting a primal scream of psychic rebirth?  5 Which ally of George Bush accepted the mythical Israeli claim to Palestine when he declared 'I'm content to have Israel grab the entire West Bank'?  6 How much space did a senior American politician's endorsement of the creation of Israeli Lebensraum receive in the American press?  7 The state television of which 'moderate' Arab country is educating viewers by presenting them a serialisation of Jewish plans to rule the world, as revealed in the anti-Semitic forgery, the Protocols of the Elders of Zion?  8 According to a poll for the Today programme, what percentage of British Muslims believe that an al-Qaeda attack on Britain would be justified?  9 What did Ayaan Hirsi Ali, a Dutch citizen and Muslim adviser to the country's Labour Party, have to do after she said orthodox Islam covered up wife-beating child abuse and other assaults on women?  10 Which pious British politician said Christian fundamentalists produced 'very good' exam results and therefore must be allowed to continue to teach creationism at the state-financed Emmanuel City Technology College in Gateshead?  <B>Orders of Merit</B> 11 Which British social reformer who died this year invented the concept of 'the meritocracy' in a 1958 dystopian fantasy about the rise of an 'insufferably smug' elite which believes 'their advancement comes from their own merits' and tolerates 'no block on the rewards they arrogate to themselves'?  12 How did this co-author of the 1945 Labour Manifesto respond to the spectacle of Tony Blair and Gordon Brown declaring themselves 'meritocrats' and accepting 'grievous inequality without a bleat'?  13 The basic salary of a trained fire officer is £21,000. To the nearest year, for how many years would a fire officer have to save the lives of others before he earned: <BR>(i) The £754,000 salary and benefits of Paul Dacre, the editor-in-chief of the  Mail newspapers which condemned the 'fat cat pay' of Andy Gilchrist, the leader of the Fire Brigades Union?<BR>   (ii) The £14.7 million in Associated Press shares Dacre will receive in 2008 if the papers maintain their performance? <BR>  (iii) The £500,000 the Blairs spent on two flats for their son at the very moment they were denouncing fire-fighters as 'wreckers'?<BR>   (iv) The £157.7m Britain's highest paid executive, Philip Green of BHS, collected in 2002?  (Reminder: No calculators allowed in this exam, children.) 14 In 2002 Gavyn Davies, the chairman of the BBC governors, denounced those who criticised the corporation's flight from public-service standards as 'southern, white and middle-class' elitists. To the nearest £10m or so how much did this ragged-trousered and furnace-scarred tribune of the slum-towns' ethnic yoof make when his partnership in the Goldman Sachs investment bank was sold?  15 Lakshmi Mittal, an Indian businessman, gave £125,000 to New Labour. Tony Blair lobbied to win his steel company a £300m contract in Romania. This appeared to be an open-and-shut case of corruption. Blair maintained, however, that he had done nothing wrong because the company was 'British'. All he had done was work the phones to protect British jobs. <BR>(i) In which country is Mittal's LMN steel company registered for tax purposes? <BR>(ii) How many of LMN's 125,000 workers are employed in Britain? <BR>(iii) What was LMN's American arm lobbying George Bush to do?  16 The Tory peer Lord Wakeham was on the Enron board. His tasks included approving the accounts of a company which was about to go bust in one of the biggest frauds in capitalist history and offering advice on how to handle the media. He was also chairman of the Press Complaints Commission. In addition, Blair made him chairman of the Royal Commission on the future of the House of Lords which told a grateful PM the British didn't deserve an elected second chamber. How many other directorships did His Lordship enjoy before his disgrace?  17 How did Tony Blair respond to George Bush's signing of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act earlier this year which required executives and auditors to submit honest accounts?  <B>Liberty For and Against</B> 18 Apologists for al-Qaeda have argued that mass murders were inchoate protests against US-inspired genocide from Vietnam to Chile. American authorisation of Indonesia's invasion of East Timor was mentioned repeatedly. How did al-Qaeda let the comrades down when it gave its reasons for supporting the massacre of Australians in Bali?  19 Which novelist wrote in his account of how Stalin was a very wicked man that the noise of his baby daughter crying had forced him to call for the nanny? ('"The sounds she was making," I said unsmilingly to my wife on her return, "would not have been out of place in the deepest cellars of the Butyrki Prison in Moscow during the Great Terror."')  20 Which left-wing Labour MP denounces sanctions against Iraq now it is Britain's and America's enemy but called for 'no trade, no aid, no deals' with the 'fascist' Saddam in 1988 when Iraq was Britain's and America's friend? 21 Who condemned the Human Rights Act because it encouraged 'people to take up causes which will make the pursuit of a sane, civilised and ordered existence ever more difficult'? 22 Isn't he meant to keep his nose out of politics? 23 Which ferocious journalist responded to the rise of the neo-Nazi British National Party by ignoring all evidence of the party's criminality and contenting himself with the following interrogation?  <BR>Interviewer:  Mr Griffin, let me ask you a simple question: if one of your children fell in love with a Muslim or an Asian, what would you do?  <BR>Griffin  (leader of the BNP): I would be very unhappy about it because I do see two very different lives with their own heritage and their own culture being destroyed.  <BR>Interviewer (turning into Gwyneth Paltrow): Do you think that's a greater consideration than the fact that they might be in "lurv"?24 How many of the 11 Arabs interned after 11 September without trial or charge have managed to confound David Blunkett's assertions that they are terrorists despite their denial of basic legal rights?  <B>The answers</B>1 Kenneth Lay of Enron 
2 Yes 
3 The strawberry 
4 Melon, papaya and mud 
5 Dick Armey, Republican leader in the House of Representatives 
6 Scarcely a paragraph 
7 Egypt 
8 Eight per cent 
9 Run for her life 
10 Blair 
11 (Lord) Michael Young 
12 'I have been sadly disappointed' 
13 (i) 36; (ii) 700; (iii) 24; (iv) 7,510 
14 Estimates vary between £100m and £170 million so you ought to have got this one 
15 (i) The Dutch Antilles; (ii) 100; (iii) Keep British steel out of the US 
16 18 
17 He lobbied Bush to exempt UK companies 
18 Australia was being punished for its 'despicable effort' to liberate East Timor from     Indonesian rule 
19 Martin Amis 
20 Jeremy Corbyn 
21 Prince Charles 
22 I thought so too 
23 Jeremy Paxman 
24 Two so far