It wasn't much more than a week ago that the Tories announced an end to their war against single parents. This was tactical rather than practical, I believe, since it is customary for the end of a war to be announced by its winner. The Tories must have hoped thereby to persuade us that they had won. Whereas in fact, by any measurable scale, single parents must have won, since it's statistically impossible in this country to be less popular than the Conservative party. Principal carers (as lone parents are so non-judgmentally known by the child support agency) must have thought they would be given a short while to regroup and maybe hand out a few medals, but no, a new war has been launched almost immediately, this time by the government itself. Poor carers, they must feel like Poland.  In an effort to make things "fairer and faster", the CSA has announced a new scale to calculate the financial input of the non-resident parent. The formula, which was meant to be introduced in April but will not take effect until some time next year, requires the absent parent to pay 15% of his or her income for one child, 20% for two and 25% for three. This amounts to a cut in payments to single parents of up to 19%, but does not affect the ones who live on benefits. Therefore, it is effectively a penalty on being a single parent with a job, which is a little bit rich coming from a government that spent so much of its first term trying to get single parents back to work.  The CSA's position is that the system needs to be changed, because it is unworkable at the moment. It has some good evidence to support this claim - in August, it transpired that the agency had written off £2bn worth of debt, and considered a further £150m "uncollectable".   Sir John Bourne, the auditor general, estimated in July that 81% of the CSA's maintenance assessments were wrong. In other words, this is the most comprehensively rubbish finance collection agency this country has ever seen. If a lone parent failed at its quotidian duties this woefully, it would have its children taken away.  So, the quest for simplification and greater efficiency is understandable, but when the end result is to round down the amount owed to the main carer, you can't help thinking that behind this fiasco there's prejudice at work.  Try to imagine what would happen if the Inland Revenue got most people's tax assessments wrong, wrote off vast quantities of its debts because it couldn't be bothered to chase them and then said "sod it, let's charge them all a bit less, and see if that works". Well, it would make the whole business of being taxed a lot more fun, and we wouldn't be able to afford a war against Iraq, but on the downside, society would disintegrate and we would all get cholera.  The decision is absolutely obscure; it doesn't benefit the working single parent, and ultimately it cannot benefit the government. If the employed are to be penalised, those on very low incomes will necessarily be forced out of work and back on the dole. The only people gaining from this are the absent parents, who are in effect being rewarded for the merry £2bn dance they've led the CSA on since its inception nine years ago.  Of course, this is infinitely worse than the now-defunct Tory war - it doesn't make any difference to anyone whether or not the opposition party thinks they got pregnant just to get a council flat. If anything, the act of annoying Norman Tebbit might add to your overall quality of life.  The government scheme, on the other hand, has important and damaging financial ramifications. But the thinking behind New Labour and Old Tory is the same - single parents are quite simply worth less than other groups. They are worth less than dual parents, they are worth less than the childless and - most ridiculously - they are worth less than absent parents. Their payments are chased less tenaciously than bloody parking fines, they were harried back to work with the most patronising of poster campaigns and now they are penalised for being in work.  The very people who demonstrate their sense of social responsibility most assiduously are the ones who are treated with least respect by their society. Conceivably, this all stems from a moral agenda that still puts some crazy value on marital respectability, even though the only people who really stay married for life these days are politicians themselves, and that's just because they have such, ahem, fun-packed professional lives.  Possibly, there is a misogynist undertone here since, though we all strive with modern even-handedness not to group resident and absent parents by gender, the former are still mainly women. I wonder, though, whether it isn't all a bit more pragmatic than that - lone parents are notoriously time-poor individuals, being so busy with kids and whatnot. If you're going to victimise anyone, you may as well victimise the ones who don't have time to fight back.  · 