In a satirical English newspaper called the Poke, manifestly based on the Onion but no less tickling for that, there was a headline last month saying "Dame Judi Dench Appears in Hustler Magazine: Nation Appalled, But Compelled to Look", illustrated by a picture of Dench's head superimposed on a young lovely's naked body (which, sure enough, appalled one, yet compelled one to look). This Edwina Currie business recalls the story rather forcefully, with the extra fascination of being true. Many commentators maintain that the affair between John Major and Currie is interesting because of his back-to-basics stance and trenchant anti-sleaze rhetoric. He would never have been made leader had this hypocrisy been uncovered at the time, the theory runs, and the course of politics would have been changed for ever. Well, yeah, up to a point - apart from the fact that his tenure as prime minister was about the most tedious thing to have happened to this country since Pepys, and left no residue at all bar a national scorn for people who tuck their shirts into their pants.  Currie herself is burdened by a far more surreal illusion - that the affair is interesting on the level of romance, and that we want to hear about their feelings for one another out of simple human interest. "But Oh, as I sit here in the flat, B is here too - in spirit! - and I wish I knew he would be knocking on the door in 10 minutes, I would not have tears dripping gently off my nose right now," she writes, casting herself as the romantic and vulnerable heroine to Major's dashing, powerful hero. On the one hand, she must know how laughably improbable this tableau is; on the other hand, she can't be in this for the laughs. Can she?   The real allure of this story has nothing to do with politics, or human interest, or the possibility that Major won't get a knighthood. It is interesting because it is grotesque. Everything about it is grotesque. From Currie's trilling assertion - "to seduce him, easy" - through her coy allusion to his "sweet taste" (oh Jesus), to her doughty defence of their sex life - "He wasn't very ashamed at the time, I can tell you!", every new innuendo is a fresh hell. This is the kind of horror-show sex you watch squirming, with your hands over your eyes.  Right, I'm parading some gross gender-based double standards here, and I'd argue that they're pretty universally held. We can all cope with the image of a middle-aged man with the younger woman, but a visual of crinkly-on-crinkly sex is way too much to stomach. (Some people will take issue with the notion that Currie and Major were crinklies at the time, being just 42 and 45 respectively. This is a fair point, but unhelpful - all politicians look about 55 until they go mad, upon which they look 90.)  So, pick an affair, any affair, between a male politician and an Other Woman (Cecil Parkinson, Jeffrey Archer, Alan Clark), and you'll get a lot of talk about perjury, standards and sleaze, but no voices at all saying "Ew! But he was so old! How could she?" Of Major's indiscretion, however, his sister immediately piped up with "at least it wasn't Ann Widdecombe" (translation: Currie may not be the least attractive woman in Westminster, but she's getting on that way). Mary Archer said, far less obliquely, "I am a little surprised, not at Mrs Currie's indiscretion, but at the temporary lapse in John Major's taste."  The crime here is not the adultery, but the fact of a middle-aged woman portraying herself as a sex object. This is particularly abhorrent to a certain stamp of Tory lady, but there's a strong top note of revulsion everywhere you look.  This is all part of the same daft, hand-me-down ideology that decides Major was a "stud" and Currie was a "slapper". An entrenched cultural misogyny tells us repeatedly that women over 40 aren't attractive while men are, but the truth is middle-aged men do fancy middle-aged women. It may sound crazy, when there are real-life teenagers out there, but attraction doesn't always operate on purely visual grounds. Practically the whole cabinet had a warmie for Margaret Thatcher.  The idea that men have a vastly extended shelf-life over women is all a big confidence trick; they pull it off by writing memoirs about their racy infidelities in their fifties; they demand to be cast as romantic leads at the age of 60; they assert themselves as sexual beings until the day they die (or have trouble downstairs, whichever is the sooner). And women don't, because we are wimps, and we worry about the likes of the absurd Mary Archer and primsy considerations of "taste".  Edwina Currie might have an amazingly irritating delivery and an equally amazing capacity for self-delusion, but gender inequalities are ironed out by women like her: women who breach social etiquette rather than just remarking upon its anomalies; women who know the rules about decorum and ageing gracefully, but can't believe any of it applies to them. She was a rubbish politician, but we might make a pioneer of her yet.  · 