At the weekend, yet another senior Tory rocked the nation by revealing herself to be really very rightwing indeed. Baroness Cox, deputy speaker in the House of Lords, came out firmly in support of a book called Great Britain Has Fallen (you know where this one's going). Written by the evangelist Wale Babatunde, it contends that a) homosexuality should be banned; b) abortion is a lot like the Holocaust; and c) that the death of Princess Diana was a mark of God's displeasure at her unfaithful doings. Cox organised the launch for the book, and commented that it "will help show the way forward", along with some associated blarney about the richness of the Judaeo-Christian tradition in this country.  The call went up to have her whip removed (that way, she can still hang 'em but she won't be able to flog 'em), and Labour MP Tom Watson urged Iain Duncan Thingo to have the baroness stand down as deputy speaker.  There's every reason to suspect that Iain will ultimately do as he's told. These notions are, after all, no less zany than Ann Winterton's idiosyncratic contention that Pakistanis should be thrown out of windows, and he got rid of her quick smart.  But, zany though these ideas may be, are they really radically at odds with the Tory sensibility? The Conservative party may have had a field day embracing the outed Alan Duncan (in a manly way, like soldiers), but on all the important policy matters with homosexuality involved, they show nothing like this beaming tolerance. It was only two years ago that Duncan Smith was implacably opposed to gays in the army ("This has never been about prejudice but about the operational effectiveness of our armed forces," he said, leaving it tolerantly unspoken that gay men would spoil effectiveness by talking about make-up and attempting rough sex in the line of fire). As the repeal of Section 28 becomes more pressing, there looks to be a serious Tory divide on the matter (and that's going to shake the nation to its casters - Small Opposition That Couldn't Even Make A Difference If United Is Now Experiencing Divide).   Duncan Smith may be in favour of the section's repeal (having undergone rather a profound change of heart), but at least a quarter of his shadow cabinet is adamantly against it, and a further quarter is "neutral" (translated roughly: "don't like gaylords; want to keep job"). As for abortion, Duncan Smith is opposed to it, on the basis of his Christian belief in the sanctity of life, ergo he sees abortion as murder, ergo his position is really pretty close to the abortion qua Holocaust analogy. Regarding the death of Princess Diana, it really doesn't matter who thinks what about the will of God - since, short of doing God's work for him and introducing Sharia law for the unfaithful Modern Mrs, it's quite tricky to translate that into a policy matter.  The Tory party has for the past year been characterised by slavish attempts to be cool and modern. Duncan Smith, after years as the protégé of crazy man Tebbit, fought his leadership election with this funny mulch of rabid patriotism, milky acceptance of "different adult lifestyles", and the fact that the concepts "left and right" meant little to him.  Clearly, some focus mogul somewhere has decreed that young people don't like hardline social authoritarianism, and the party has to modernise. Since we've actually gone past the point where we could ban homosexuality, that's one of the cheapest concessions, and lo, suddenly "different adult lifestyles" are fun, fun, fun. But the fact remains that, just as the Labour party still contains red-blooded socialists (much as they deny it), the Conservative party still contains red-toothed rightwingers. Duncan Smith can reprimand them, he can expel them and he can bury them in the kind of job where they're never asked to comment on anything apart from owls. But the only thing he will thus promote is the current dissonance between the trendy London face of the party, and the provincial reality, in which - of the 28 constituencies who have so far selected a candidate - the same old attitudes prevail (only two new women; no ethnic minorities; most of the candidates fighting on a Hague-ish, aren't-asylum-seekers-cunning ticket).  The truth is, rightwingers belong in the Conservative party; homophobes belong in the Conservative party; Eurosceptics and racists and Christian fundamentalists and people who think it's been downhill since 1914 - they all belong in the Conservative party. They do not run counter to everything the Tories stand for - they simply run counter to what the polls keep telling the Tories they should be standing for.  The Mori-powered drive for a broad, quasi-liberal orthodoxy throughout parliament has sent hardline Tories underground (where, like rabbits, they are much more dangerous) and left the frontbenchers of both parties with ideologies that are indistinguishable. As long as there are Baroness Coxes in the Tory mix, we need them to be able to stand up and show us what they're made of. Otherwise, the whole palaver becomes insidious and, worse, incredibly tedious. · 