This month, apart from being very hot, has been characterised by a fair amount of hysteria concerning the information superhighway (which is another term for the internet). The upset has come mainly from the two major political parties, and from a spectator's point of view, it's been a lot like watching your grandparents play Grand Theft Auto (which is a game for the Playstation 2 console): they don't understand it, they're pressing the controls too hard, and they're going to break it if they're not careful. First up, because they are always the daftest, are the Tories, who are pursuing the author of a poison pen column featured on the site www.electricreview.com (popular among "younger Tories" - since, incidentally, the average age of a Tory member is 67, that phrase could mean anything at all). The Snake, which is how this author likes to be known, has been writing rude things about candidates. Party aide Gavin Barwell is "hamster face, for indeed his visage is hamsterish"; Stewart Jackson (Peterborough candidate) has an "estuarine" accent; and Caroline Nokes (Romsey candidate) is "not necessarily the sharpest nail-file in the beauty salon". Oh my sides.  The very funniest of these remarks (the hamster one) sounds like a woeful sixth-form attempt to be Pythonesque, apart from the fact that sixth-formers today would no more try to ape Monty Python than they would attempt a hilarious impression of Clement Attlee. The other two remarks are not jokes at all but, respectively, coarse snobbery and base misogyny - although I would guess that the author felt a tickle of pride at having put a stylish new twist on that unbeatable classic "all women are irredeemably thick".  By any standards available from Google (which is a search engine), this is way below par - internet jokes are meant to be funny, for God's sake. That's why people send them to each other instead of working. This kind of stuff wouldn't have got a laugh in the Wipers Times. It's a misuse of the whole e-facility; it's like using a palm pilot as a handy place to stick Post-it Notes.  Meanwhile, over at the BBC (where the average age is somewhat younger than 67, but the old guys are exceedingly noisy), there seems to be some confusion about the very nature of these new-fangled computer machines. John Simpson wrote recently that some of his colleagues felt "morally certain" that Downing Street staff had been hacking into their system. This is because, in 1997, Big Brother (which is the government, not the programme) lobbied the Beeb to change bits of scripts that had yet to be broadcast (what a killer phrase that is, "morally certain" - it's the kind of thing people say in the grip of cocaine psychosis. "Nope, I didn't see you do it, but I feel morally certain you did!").  What this denotes is not a fear of Downing Street but a fear of the computer system itself. If the BBC were still working with paper and pens, he'd have suspected a leak; because it's on a computer, it's hacking. The man's been watching too much telly. The ensuing row - Downing Street responded with a sneering "This is utter drivel", while the Tories strove manfully to make an embarrassment out of this miniature notion - suggests a parliament-wide, cross-party fear of all new technology.  While there's no way the youngsters at spin-city hacked into the BBC's system, whoever uttered the "drivel" remark clearly thinks they might have done (it's so over-protesty). The Tories will believe anything as long as it wasn't their fault, and hey presto - you have the leading minds of the nation seriously discussing whether or not the government is practising espionage techniques on the world's favourite broadcaster.  Let's get a few things straight here: while it's true that you probably shouldn't send your computer to the mender if you have a lot of dog-porn bookmarked, these machines are not open invitations for people to rob you of your secrets. They are, in most respects, like filing cabinets, letters and suchlike. Sure, people can break into them, but only if they're prepared to put a hell of a lot of effort in, and jettison all their ethics.  If you think of a person or an organisation, and you can't imagine them hovering by a postbox to intercept your correspondence, the overwhelming likelihood is that they wouldn't mess about with your emails either. On the subject of emails - these useful things are a sort of cross between a phone call and a letter. If you come up with a "joke" which wouldn't warrant dissemination by traditional methods, then it doesn't need immortalisation on the net either.  And finally, it's extremely difficult to take people seriously when they can't have a functional relationship with their work tools. It's one thing not to be able to set a video recorder in the privacy of your own home, but playing out this technophobia - not to mention the gross lack of e-etiquette - in front of the voting public gives us the heebie-jeebies. You people are meant to be in charge!  