Over the weekend, it transpired that Gordon Brown is set to continue on his chosen course of being all gong and no dinner, vis a vis the euro. "He has ruled out a referendum on the euro before the next election," said the Sunday Mirror - which was the only paper to say such a thing, and hasn't, in fact, sparked a host of other papers saying similar things, so there's always a possibility that it might not turn out to be completely true. But that, ladies and gentleman, is the unique charm of the man. Gordon Brown is generally described as prudent, which might be true enough, fiscally speaking, but quite glosses over his behavioural model. Caprice, whimsy and hard-to-get-ness are its cornerstones. He speaks as if from behind a modest fan; as if he's playing an old-fashioned dating game with 30 million of us at once. In short, he has been reading The Rules.  Anyone with even a passing interest in America will be familiar with this slender work - two women, one of whom (astoundingly!) is now divorced, set out 35 rules for snagging a husband. The first two (have long hair; always wear lipstick, even when jogging) have had no impact on Gordon, which is how he's managed to avoid being unmasked for so long. The central notion of the book, however, the bona fide, reel-em-in, killer idea is this - never ask anyone if they love you/want to marry you/ would like a single European currency, unless you're sure they'll say yes. In marital terms, this generally means don't ask at all, wait to be asked. Politically, this needs to be adapted; even in moments of craven optimism, Brown can't expect us all to say with one voice "Darling, would you ... well, would you consider letting us join the euro now?" So, he's allowed to ask, but in accordance with The Rules, cannot brook the possibility of rejection.  Consequently, this referendum is never going to happen; not unless we all get together and come up with some scam to make it look like we'll definitely approve (and if we could pull off collective action like that, we'd be Sweden).  In the light of this self-help discovery, everything starts to make a curious kind of sense. When Flash first came out with his five economic tests for joining the euro, the main reaction was "these are very nice tests, but they don't seem to mean an awful lot". "Will joining Emu help to promote higher growth, stability and a lasting increase in jobs?" asked our suitor. "Will things be better all around, with particular amelioration in the regions of business, banks and other places of money generation?" he wondered.  This wasn't, at the time, considered a watertight way of going about things - sounding, as it does, a lot like "let's do it now, because I say so!" However, he was merely acting in accordance with Rule 20: Be Honest, But Mysterious. Here it is decreed that, whatever the advantages of clarity and open-handedness, in the long run things are more likely to run in your favour if no one ever knows what you mean quite as well as you do.  This one is paying off in spades for Gordon - the five tests are under two years old, and people stopped wondering what they meant ages ago. (Of course, many politicians have acted mysteriously over the years, but Brown is the only one to mix in the honesty element that so pleases the vigilant voter). He also has a reputation for strength and silence, which will come from Rule Three - Don't Stare at Men or Talk Too Much.  The authors of The Rules make some pretty grand claims for a bunch of notions that are really just variations on Lacan's dictum, "The viler you are, the better things will be for you" (though I don't think he meant that as a dating tip), but the main claim is this - by following closely, you can recreate a life of the 50s, before people became cynical and started to use one another for sex/state benefits, with no thoughts at all of long-term loyalty and commitment. Sure enough, Brown is enjoying a golden age of respect, as his approval rating outstripped even that of Blair this April, making him the most popular chancellor since Denis Healey in the 70s (there's one of the great forgotten facts of politics - people used to really like Denis Healey). All our political savvy, hard-won over years of nefarious Tory machinations and spin and faintly amusing sex scandal, disappears in the face of Gordon Brown. We think he's tops; we think he's Winston bleeding Churchill.  None of this is necessarily a bad thing - there are self-help books he could have chosen that would be far worse (it would be humiliating to be governed by an adherent of Who Moved My Cheese?, for instance). He could keep the Koran by his bed, like his slightly-less-popular employer. On balance, I think he's made the right choice. Of course, I might just be under the spell.  