I find it difficult to get into an ethical rage about Lord Archer serialising his prison diaries in the Daily Mail. It looks like the prison service can prevent his publishing the book itself while still inside. Sure, you're not supposed to profit from criminal acts via newspapers either, but this is a ruling from the press complaints commission, and you can forgive a man who is (quite literally) in prison for thinking that there are worse rules to break in life than those of the toothless PCC. Besides, he is giving the money to charity (and the gentler among us must assume that, this time, with Mary's help, he'll choose a real, locatable charity, rather than an invisible one). The contention, pushed by Labour MP Peter Bradley, that the publication of extracts will give punters an urge to read the whole book simply does not stand up to the application of logic. As for betraying the trust and privacy of the inmates, well, the guy's been swindling people since records of him began; if he let up just because he was in prison, wouldn't that be patronising?  No, the real crime of these diaries is their grinding tedium, and the tacit message underlying it. At the very real risk of compounding his offence, I quote: "I was stripped, searched for drugs and razors under an arc light with a camera following my every move."  Do things hot up later? They do not: "The cell turned out to be 15ft by 9ft, with a wash basin, lavatory with no flush, also a brick hard pillow... blah blah blah... I am passed a green pillowcase, a sheet (white) and a blanket (white)."  Everybody on earth is searched for drugs when they enter a prison. Even the most lackadaisical student of primetime telly knows that. Likewise, everybody knows that cells aren't all that capacious or comfortable (and Lord Archer, furthermore, would have bayed like the string-'em-up mongrel he is if at any stage before his conviction a leftwinger had suggested that prison accommodation be improved). The colour of the bedding, I'll come clean, I did not know - but in whose crazy imagination is that interesting?  Now, Archer, I believe, is a novelist as well as a politician. Whatever the myriad faults of his literary style, he is widely thought to have a good grasp of economy and pace. What is it about these mundane little details that he thinks is going to keep the reader gripped?  The answer lies in the observation he makes about the removal of his clothes: "'Aquascutum, Hilditch &amp; Key and Yves St Laurent,' says the officer, as another writes it down." Here's the drama, people - here's the nail-biting tension. He is too posh for this hellhole. He is too posh to be strip-searched, and he is way too posh to have a hard, green pillow. Poor conditions may be a predictable feature of incarceration, but juxtaposed with a man of real, Aquascutum class, they become extraordinary.  Jonathan King, another Oxbridge alumnus (Archer did go to Oxford, or did he make it up?), is experiencing prison slightly differently. He loves it, he reveals on his self-managed "fan" website. In the unlikely event that someone offered him £10m to do it all differently, he wouldn't have (he clearly isn't getting harassed for being a nonce, then, as predicted - he must have triumphed with his fabled skills as an entertainer).  "Money," he says, "could not buy the numerous invaluable, priceless observations I've acquired." He finds the inmates fascinating, he continues. To listen to him, you'd think he'd just spent a year observing apes. The subtext is clear: "In my warm, human way, I am studying aliens. I do not belong here."  The crux of it all is this - neither man thinks he belongs in prison, because neither appears to understand what prison is for. They think prison is for the rougher reaches of the working class; they think it's a place for people who lived in that kind of scum-hole anyway; that it's the workhouse of the 21st century, for people who fall below a sensible income.  Whereas, in fact, prison is for criminals. They are both criminals. They belong there as surely and conclusively as any of the muggers they find it so fascinating to observe.  As a core condition of parole, the prisoner has to show that he's addressed his offending behaviour, and addressed the problems that gave rise to it. If neither Archer nor King can appreciate the fact that they belong in prison, it's safe to say that they have not addressed their offending behaviour.  King has some years of his sentence to serve, so has plenty of time to arrive at a position more tenable than the one he's holding at the moment. Archer is so busy messing up his parole with his absurd passion for lunches and parties that the hearing, one assumes, is some way off.  But when they finally get to the parole board, let's hope they stick to their lofty guns. Then we'll never have to let them out.  