That Christopher Meyer's memoirs have been as controversial as their subtitle confidently asserts them to be is already a matter of record. But, read in the round, how does the book as a whole actually emerge? My answer is that Meyer's book is both better and worse than the headline-generating extracts suggest. It is better because, contrary to the implication of its subtitle, this is not only a book about 9/11 and the Iraq war, crucially important though these subjects are. Meyer's account of these events is painted on a wider canvas. His Washington years stretched from autumn 1997 to the start of 2003, so he was gone by the time the war began. The majority of his time in DC fell within the Clinton presidency, not the Bush one. Indeed Bush barely makes an appearance in this memoir until around half way through. Seen in that light, this is an important book about what it was like to be Britain's most senior and lustrous ambassador at a time when the prime minister enjoyed a direct line to the White House for which there are few precedents. The strength of the Blair-Clinton and the Blair-Bush relationships was of vast advantage to Meyer, as he acknowledges. It meant that long before 9/11, though certainly in its aftermath, he was able to bathe in reflected glory. It was, as he rightly says, a good time to be British in America. That was just as true in the Clinton as in the Blair years; there were "Blair for President" chants in Chicago as early as 1999, Meyer recalls. But the Downing Street-White House relationship was always the worm in the bud for the embassy, and by the time of Iraq it became both pettily and substantively intolerable to an ambassador who had an unusual taste for the limelight. Even before Bush, a lot of British discourse about America was mere caricature: under every president since JFK, too many British commentators have succumbed to the lazy temptation to regard the United States as a country of mad people governed by buffoons. Under Bush that tendency has become much more extreme. So it is useful to be reminded by Meyer that Bush is a more substantial figure than most here have come to regard him. And it is gratifying to read Meyer expounding wisdoms about America that can only come from experience. Every September, Meyer recalls, he would gather new arrivals to the embassy together and give them a little pep talk. The core of that message was always the same: "Think of the US as a foreign country, then you will be pleasantly surprised by the many things you find in common with this most generous and hospitable of people. Think of America as Britain writ large and you risk coming to grief; American attitudes to patriotism, religion, crime and punishment, schooling, sex, the outside world, can be very different from those of Europeans, including the British." Anyone who has spent time in America will recognise the accuracy of that. Meyer is wisely unsentimental, too, about the so-called "special relationship". The phrase was banned from use while he was ambassador, quite rightly, and he smartly observes that the only countries that can truly lay claim to such a status in Washington - in the sense of being able to have significant influence on US politics and policy - are Ireland, Israel, Saudi Arabia and Taiwan, and certainly not Britain, even under Blair or Thatcher. My dissatisfaction with Meyer's book is not that he has written it. It is that his indiscretion is selective and even calculated. As the now celebrated extracts showed, Meyer has little compunction about putting the stiletto into politicians - and into Cherie Blair, who did the Meyers many kindnesses in her time, for which she is meanly rewarded here. Meyer is also more generous to Gordon Brown in these pages - I wonder why that could be? - than he was in private, when he regularly complained about the chancellor's repeated and childish snubs. He is also protective towards fellow diplomats, officials and mandarins. Meyer's relationship with the former diplomat Jonathan Powell, Blair's chief-of-staff, was pivotal to his Washington years. So were his connections to John Sawers and Matthew Rycroft, both of them senior ex-Washington embassy figures who worked for Blair in vital periods. Crucial players all, yet they move as silently through Meyer's account as Inspector Bucket does through much of Bleak House Then there is the Catherine question. Christopher Meyer was an ambassadorial moderniser - nice, approachable, sociable and very comfortable with the media. He and Catherine were high-profile Washingtonians, and there was much talk towards the end of his term that they would decamp to New York on his retirement to become a Manhattan power couple to rival Harry and Tina themselves. It sometimes seemed to me that they risked overstepping the mark in this networking, and Meyer's account of Catherine's eurosceptic conversations with Rupert Murdoch and Richard Perle rather confirms that. Running through this book there is not just a mandarin's frustration with ministers but a radical Conservative's disdain towards Labour, even though I firmly believe that Meyer mostly did an exceptional job on Blair's behalf. In the end, though, it all comes inescapably back to Iraq. Iraq is inevitably both the pivotal subject in Meyer's account and the one on which he allows himself the most sustained exposition of his own views. Meyer makes a powerful case for the view that Britain could have caused the Bush administration to delay the invasion until late 2003, giving time to bring France and Russia onside for a second UN resolution, perhaps even forcing Saddam to quit, but certainly enabling proper attention to be given to a UN-centred plan for the post-Saddam Iraq. Would it have worked? Who can now say? But Meyer and many others of us have every right to be extremely angry that it was never given a chance. Martin Kettle was the Guardian's Washington bureau chief from 1997 to 2001.