It would be a dreadful mistake to suppose that George W Bush was the first American president who has failed to capture the hearts and minds of liberal-left British opinion. In fact, over the past half century, such disrespect towards the man in the White House has been far more the norm than the exception. We may think we love Bill Clinton now, and we may yearn for him to be miraculously - and unconstitutionally - restored to the presidency, but my God, we patronised him something rotten when he was actually there. Our appetite for tittle-tattle about Clinton's sex life and speculation about his marriage was endless, but too many of us glazed over when it came to the boring old political strategies and policies that were at the real heart of his heroic - yes, heroic - attempt to pick progressive politics up off the mat in the wake of the new right's transatlantic counter-revolution in the 1980s. This failure to take Clinton seriously was characteristic of too much of the liberal left's trivialised disdain towards real politics. It was not much different from our attitude towards most of his immediate predecessors: we were sniffy towards the elder Bush, we never got it about Reagan, we mocked Carter, laughed at Ford, despised Nixon (sometimes even we get something right) and saw only the bad side of Lyndon Johnson, arguably the greatest American politician of the past half century. We see America as a country inhabited by mad people and ruled by buffoons. Our default position was and is condescension, and it says far more about us than it does about them. John F Kennedy was the last American president who was respected by the British liberal left while he was actually in office. Even as an 11-year-old in 1961, I can still very clearly remember the sheer excitement that swept across the Atlantic as Kennedy took his place in the White House. What a speech he gave at that inaugural back in January 1961! What a model of political oratory it still remains. And it wasn't just impressionable Yorkshire schoolboys who were caught up by the heady sense that Kennedy projected of politics as the noblest of all human callings. In the Kennedy years Washington itself was seized with an enthusiasm for public service of which neither America nor Britain has ever since seen the like, which one still lives in the hope of one day seeing again, and which brought the pudgy 16-year-old William Jefferson Clinton to Washington for a handshake and a justly poignant photograph with Kennedy in the Rose Garden in the president's last summer. All of this stemmed directly from Kennedy himself, and later from his brother Bobby too, and it is this idealism - not the glamour and Camelot and Marilyn Monroe and the rest of it - that remains at the heart of the legend. Yet, 40 years to the day since he was gunned down in Dallas, a date which for some of us can never pass without the tears that well again as I write these words, we have managed to turn even Kennedy into just another celeb with feet of clay. Today it is the philandering, the mafia connections and all the other hypocrisies of what Seymour Hersh called the dark side of Camelot that too many of us think of first. Barely pausing after completing an admirable two-volume biography of LBJ, Robert Dallek has now turned to the man who put Johnson on the Democratic ticket in 1960. There must be more books about the Kennedys than about any other family in American history, and many people will wonder whether there is anything new to say. The good news is that there is, and while nothing will quite supersede the reverential tomes written by people such as Schlesinger and Sorensen who were actually there, Dallek has produced easily the best and most objective modern account of JFK. Dallek's unique selling point is that he has had access to previously unreleased records in the Kennedy Library in Boston which detail the full misery of the president's health problems - as well as the immense efforts to which he went to conceal them. How one responds to the mass of detail about Kennedy's ailments, operations, hospitalisations and medications will depend in part on whether one sees Kennedy more as a scoundrel who lied to the voters about ailments that would make him unelectable today, or more as a dreadfully afflicted man who overcame his indignities to rise to the highest seat of power. On November 22, though, it is appropriate to record that were it not for a back brace, which held him erect, his head would not have provided such a clear target for the third shot that ended his life. If Dallek perhaps goes out of his way to underplay the genuine sense of newness and excitement that Kennedy ignited in so many countries as well as his own, he nevertheless provides a very balanced account of the famous Thousand Days, stressing the very limited domestic achievements of the presidency and the distinctly mixed record in foreign affairs. What would have happened had Kennedy lived is, of course, both a fascinating and pointless topic for discussion. That he would have comfortably defeated Barry Goldwater in 1964 seems likely, in which case he would have brought many liberals to the Senate and Congress on his coat-tails, and might have pushed through the same kind of civil rights reforms that Johnson, elected on a landslide in the wake of the assassination, was able to achieve. On Cuba, suggests Dallek, Kennedy was on a radical learning curve. The Bay of Pigs was a disgraceful episode, urged on - topically, in the post-Iraq context - by advisers and exiles who exaggerated the readiness of Cubans to rise up against Castro and in support of a US invasion. At the time of his death, Dallek suggests, Kennedy could have been moving towards a rapprochement with Cuba that might have had major long-term consequences for US foreign and domestic policy alike. The great unknowable, of course, is how Kennedy might have handled Vietnam, which was the defining political experience of Bill Clinton's generation and which therefore forms the backdrop to a large section of Nigel Hamilton's biography. Hamilton's is an ambitious undertaking, as it takes Clinton only to the threshold of the presidency that will form the subject matter of volume two (and who knows what a future volume three may yet contain?). Even so, this first volume is in sensitive territory throughout, since Clinton's background and early career were and perhaps still are a political battlefield, largely because conservatives chose to take their stand against his challenge on the man himself rather than on what he stood for. No other presidential candidate in history has had to fight such a cultural war about the kind of person he is. His contemporary, George W Bush, has had an unbelievably easy ride over his own early career (including his avoidance of the Vietnam draft) by comparison. But Hamilton, who has also written a successful book on the young JFK, is right to give a very prominent place to the Arkansas issue in the Clinton story. When conservatives rage against "that man" it is not just the libertinism or even the liberalism that provokes them. It is the fact that he comes from a small, poor state that almost the entire political establishment looks down on. It would be wonderfully ironic if Wesley Clark were to unseat Bush next November, since Arkansas would then have provided two of the last three presidents. Clinton is a man of paradoxes, and Hamilton delves deep into all of them. To some, Clinton is a serious and brilliant figure who understands the transformational character of modern times better than almost any other world leader of his era. To others, he is a man without principle or scruple whose primary and perhaps only importance is as a figure of gossip and entertainment. On the one hand, there are those who see Clinton as he sees himself, as a moderniser who reshaped his party and the role of government in changed times, and whose pivotal importance will only grow with time. On the other, there are those who see him as an emblematic politician of an essentially depoliticised era, in which the presidency is of diminished and diminishing importance. Perhaps the single most difficult question facing all those who try to sum up the Clinton years is the one that Hamilton will reach only at the end of his next volume. Did he reinvent and thus save the American progressive political tradition which he inherited from Bobby Kennedy, among others? Or is his achievement essentially opportunist, sacrificing progressive ideas and aspirations in favour of the desire to stay in office at any cost in a generally conservative country? The conventional view of Clinton is that he is a bad man but was a good president. Rather similar to the general verdict these days on John Kennedy, in fact. In both cases there are few who can agree on exactly how these two contrasting judgments can be meshed together, even now.