शान्ति मन्त्र वेदों के वे मंत्र हैं जो शान्ति की प्रार्थना करते हैं। प्राय: हिन्दुओं के धार्मिक कृत्यों के आरम्भ और अन्त में इनका पाठ किया जाता है। 
Shanti Mantras are found in Upanishads, where they are invoked in the beginning of some topics of Upanishads. They are supposed to calm the mind of reciter and environment around him/her. Reciting them is also believed to be removing any obstacles for the task being started. 
Shanti Mantras always end with three utterances of word "Shanti" which means "Peace". The Reason for uttering three times is for calming and removing obstacles inthree realms which are: 
"Physical" or अधिभौतिक,
"Divine" or अधिदैविक
and "Internal" or आध्यात्मिक 
According to the scriptures of Hinduism sources of obstacles and troubles are in these three realms.
Physical or Adhi-Bhautika realm can be source of troubles/obstacles coming from external world, such as from wild animals, people, natural calamities etc.
Divine or Adhi-Daivika realm can be source of troubles/obstacles coming fromextra-sensory world of spirits, ghosts, deities, demigods/angels etc.
Internal or Adhyaatmika realm is source of troubles/obstacles arising out of ones own body and mind, such as pain, diseases, laziness, absent-mindedness etc.
These are called "Tapa-Traya" or three classes of troubles.When Shanti mantras are recited, obstacles from these realms are believed to bepacified. 
That Creator is Absolute, Complete and Full. This Universe is Absolutely Complete and Full. Only Absolutely Complete springs off That Absolute!
From That Absolute, even if Whole Absolute is taken out, only Absolute does remain! 
OM Peace, Peace, Peace.
OM may Mitra do good to us, may Varuna do good to us,
May Aryama do good to us,
May Indra do good to us, may Brihaspati do good to us,
May Vishnu-who has vast coverage-do good to us,
 Salute O Brahma!,
Salutations to you O Vayu!,
Only you are the visible Brahman.
I say only you are the visible Brahman,
I say rta ,
I say truth,
May that protect me,
May that protect teacher,
May it protect me,
May it protect teacher,
OM Peace, Peace, Peace.
OM. Let us both protect each other together!
May both of us enjoy together!
May both of us put our energies together!
May our studies be radiantly glorious!
May there be no hatred between us!
OM Peace, Peace, Peace!
OM may my organs, speech, Prana, eyes and ears be nourished and be well, so should all senses become strong. Upanishad says all this is Brahman. I don't reject Brahman, may Brahma not reject me. Let there be no rejection, let there be no rejection at all in me, let me be concentrated on Self, all those ways of righteous living told in Upanishads be in me! Be in me, OM Peace, Peace, Peace.
OM let my speech be established in mind, and mind be established in my speech, May Brahman reveal itself to me! May I be able to grasp the truths of the Vedas! Let not what I have heard forsake me! May I spend both day and night in study! I say rta, I'll say the Truth; may that protect me! May that protect the teacher! May it protect me; and may it protect the speaker as well!OM Peace, Peace, Peace.
OM O gods! Let us hear good things from our ears! O worshipful ones! let us see good things with our eyes! May our organs and body be stable, healthy and strong! May we do in the life span allotted to us by gods what pleases them.
May Indra extolled profusely in the scriptures do good to us!
May Pushan knower of world do good to us!
May Taarkshya destroyer of enemies do good to us!
May Brihaspati establish good in us!
OM Peace, Peace, Peace.
There are various Other sources of Shanti Mantras, of which some of the most famous are:
May peace radiate there in the whole sky, as well as in the vast ethereal space everywhere!
May peace reign all over this earth, in waters and in all herbs, trees and creepers! 
May peace flow over the whole universe!
May peace flow in from the Supreme Being Brahman!
May there always exist peace in everything!
It should be peace and peace alone!
May that peace reach me too!
Om May peace, peace and peace be there in material, physical and spiritual existences!

OM! Lead us from the unreal to the real!
Lead us from darkness to light!
Lead us from death to immortality!!
Om may peace, peace and peace be there in material, physical and spiritual existences!!
