KHO KHO FEDERATION OF INDIA 
The primary sports body for this game is called the Kho-Kho Federation of India . It has its branches in all the states and it has been conducting Mini, Junior and Open National Championships for both sexes, in many parts of India. 
KHO KHO FEDERATIO0N OF INDIA was established in the year 1956 with modern rules of the game under the leadership of GREAT Lt. BHAI NERURKAR of Maharashtra, Lt. Bhupati Mazumder, Lt. Sambhunath Mallik, and Lt. Deben Bose of West Bengal.
In 1959-60, the first national Kho-Kho championship was organised in Vijayawada . The Government has initiated the following awards for the game: Arjuna Award, Eklavya Award for men, Rani Laxmi Bai award for women, Veer Abhimanyu award for boys under 18, and Janaki award for girls under 16.
In the year 1960, KHO KHO FEDERATION OF INDIA shouldered responsibilities to popularizes this game in schools, colleges & clubs etc. In the same year first Kho Kho National was conducted only for men at Vijayawada. 3 teams participated. In the year 1961, National in women section was introduced, four teams were participated. 
In the year 1960, KHO KHO FEDERATION OF INDIA shouldered responsibilities to popularizes this game in schools, colleges & clubs etc. In the same year first Kho Kho National was conducted only for men at Vijayawada. 3 teams participated. In the year 1961, National in women section was introduced, four teams were participated. 
In the year 1963-64 to recognized the players to the service towards the game Kho Kho Federation of India introduced best player AWARD EKALABYA in men section and RANI JHANSI in women section. Kho Kho Federation of India started to organize Junior National Championship for boys in the year 1970 & for girls in 1972. Best AWARD in Junior National to encourage youngstars instituted VEER ABHIMANYU for boys and JANAKI in girls section.In the year 1980, Sub Junior National was introduced in both section boys & girls. AWARD for best sub junior players was instituted BHARAT in boys and ILA in girls section. 
As one of the academic disciplines systematic study of the game was introduced in Sports Authourity of India as six week certificate course. In the year 1977 duration of course was increased to 10 months. As Kho Kho & Kabadi were a combined course it is difficult to complete the course in 10 months. So from this year Kho Kho is separated for training of Coaches of 10 months duration. In the year 1985 Kho Kho has been included in 1st NATIONAL GAMES held in Delhi by personal intervention of Sri Ashok Ghosh then President Bengal Olympic Association.
