महार रेजिमेंट भारतीय सेना का एक इन्फैन्ट्री रेजिमेंट है। यद्यपि मूलतः इसे महाराष्ट्र के महार सैनिकों को मिलाकर बनाने का विचार था, किन्तु केवल यही भारतीय सेना का एकमात्र रेजिमेन्ट है जिसे भारत के सभी समुदायों और क्षेत्रों के सैनिकों को मिलाकर बनाया गया है।
महार स्काउट्स और उनकी सेना किले में सैनिकों के रूप में मराठा राजा शिवाजी द्वारा भर्ती किए गए थे। उनका एक बडा हिस्सा बनाने कंपनी के बम्बई सेना के छठे हिस्से में ईस्ट इण्डिया कम्पनी कंपनी द्वारा भर्ती किए गए थे। बम्बई सेना उनकी बहादुरी और ध्वज के प्रति वफादारी के लिए महार सैनिकों इष्ट और इसलिए भी क्योंकि वे आंग्ल-मराठा युद्ध के दौरान पर भरोसा किया जा सकता है। वे कई सफलताओं हासिल की है, कोरेगांव की लड़ाई, जहां महार बहुल कंपनी सैनिकों को एक बहुत बड़ा पेशवा बाजीराव द्वितीय के नेतृत्व में पराजित में भी शामिल है। यह लड़ाई एक ओबिलिस्क, कोरेगांव स्तंभ है, जो भारतीय स्वतंत्रता जब तक महार रेजिमेंट के शिखर पर छापा रूप में जाना द्वारा मनाया गया। बम्बई सेना की महार सैनिकों ने 1857 के भारतीय विद्रोह] में कार्रवाई को देखा, और दो रेजिमेंटों में शामिल हो गए इस रेजिमेंट के ब्रिटीश युद्ध तहत विद्रोह "बोलो हिंदुस्तान की जय" है।

विद्रोह के बाद भारतीय सेना के ब्रिटिश अधिकारियों, विशेष रूप से जो प्रथम और द्वितीय अफगान युद्ध में सेवा की थी, मार्शल दौड़ सिद्धांत के लिए मुद्रा देने के लिए शुरू किया। यह सिद्धांत था कि कुछ भारतीय जातियों और समुदायों के बीच स्वाभाविक रूप से जंगी, और अधिक दूसरों की तुलना में युद्ध के लिए अनुकूल थे। इस सिद्धांत का एक प्रमुख प्रस्तावक लार्ड रॉबर्ट्स, जो नवंबर 1885 में कमांडर-इन-चीफ के भारतीय सेना के बन रहे अन्य समुदायों की हानि के लिए धीरे-धीरे भारतीय सेना के 'Punjabisation "था। महार सैनिकों के लिए अंतिम झटका, 1892 में आया जब यह "वर्ग रेजिमेंटों" संस्थान को भारतीय सेना में निर्णय लिया गया। महारों इन वर्ग रेजिमेंटों में शामिल नहीं थे, और यह अधिसूचित किया गया था कि महारों, कुछ अन्य वर्गों के साथ के बीच, अब भारतीय सेना में भर्ती हो गए थे। महार सैनिकों, जो 104 वायसराय कमीशन अधिकारी और गैर कमीशन अधिकारियों और सिपाहियों के एक मेजबान शामिल demobilized थे। इस घटना को एक सरकारी वे एक सौ से अधिक वर्षों के लिए काम किया था द्वारा अपनी वफादारी की एक विश्वासघात के रूप में महारों ने माना गया था।
After the demobilisation of the Mahar troops, there were many attempts by the leaders of the Mahar community to persuade the Government to let them serve in the Army once again. Petitions to this effect were drafted by ex-soldiers such as Gopal Baba Walangkar in 1894, and Shivram Janba Kamble in 1904. These petitions were supported in principle by the politician and social reformer Gopal Krishna Gokhale, who was opposed to the Martial Races theory. They were also supported by the Indian National Congress, who were also opposed to the recruiting policies of the Army.
The recruitment policies of the British Indian Army continued until the beginning of the First World War in 1914. The War forced the Government to begin more broad-based recruiting, and the Mahars were at last allowed to enlist in the Army. One battalion of Mahar troops, the 111th Mahars was raised in the June 1917. However, the battalion did not see much service during the War, and in 1920 it was merged with the 71st Punjabis. Finally, the battalion was disbanded in March 1921, and the Mahars were once again demobilised.
The period between the wars saw increased efforts by the Mahars to persuade the government to let them enlist in the Army. One proponent of Mahar recruitment was Dr. B. R. Ambedkar, whose father, Sub. Maj. Ramji Maloji Sakpal had been a soldier in the British Indian Army. However, the proposed reorganisation of the Indian Army that was to occur in the 1930s was postponed because of a lack of funds in the Great Depression. In 1939, the Second World War broke out, and once again, the Army was forced to overlook its narrow minded recruitment policies in the face of harsh necessity.
In the July 1941, B. R. Ambedkar was appointed to the Defence Advisory Committee of the Viceroy's Executive Council. He used this appointment to exert pressure within the military establishment for a Mahar regiment. He also appealed to the Mahars to join the Army in large numbers. In October, the Army gave in, and the 1st Battalion of the Mahar Regiment was raised in Belgaum under Lt. Col. HJR Jackson of the 13th Frontier Force Rifles and Sub. Maj. Sheikh Hassnuddin. The 2nd Battalion was raised in Kamptee in June 1942 under Lt. Col. JWK Kirwan and Sub. Maj. Bholaji Ranjane. A cap badge was designed for the Regiment by Capt. EEL Mortlemans, an officer of 2nd Mahar. The badge featured the Koregaon Pillar over the word "MAHAR". The third battalion, the 25th Mahars, was raised in Belgaum in the August 1942 by Lt. Col V. Chambier and Sub. Maj. Sardar Bahadur Ladkojirao Bhonsale, and the 3rd Mahars were raised in Nowshera by Lt. Col. RND Frier and Sub. Maj. Bholaji Ranjane. During the War, the 1st and 3rd Mahars served in the North-West Frontier Province, while the 2nd and 25th Battalions were employed on internal security duties within the country. The 2nd Battalion also saw service in the Burma Campaign as a part of the 23rd Indian Division, where they suffered 5 casualties and had one officer Mentioned in dispatches. They also served in Iraq after the War as a part of PAIFORCE. In 1946, the 25th Mahars were disbanded, along with many other garrison battalions of the Indian Army. Its officers and men were largely absorbed by the other three battalions of the Regiment. In the October 1946, the Regiment was converted into a Machine Gun Regiment, and the Regimental Centre was established at Kamptee. Following conversion of the Regiment to a machine-gun regiment, the cap-badge was changed. The new badge had two crossed Vickers machine guns over the Koregaon Pillar, over a scroll that said "The Mahar MG Regiment". The three surviving battalions of the regiment served as a part of the Punjab Boundary Force, and took part in escorting refugees during the Partition of India.
The Border Scouts were an irregular force formed by the people of the border villages in East Punjab during Partition. Hailing as they did from the erstwhile greater state of East Punjab, the force had people hailing from a greater mix of ethnic, religious and caste backgrounds than was the norm in the Indian Army. They did some useful work defending villages from attacks during partition, and as a reward, were given a more permanent character as the East Punjab Frontier Scouts in 1948. They served along the border with Pakistan as border guards, and were regarded as a useful adjunct of the Punjab Armed Police. The unit was redesignated the 1st, 2nd and 3rd Battalions of the Border Scouts in 1951, with recruitment from different North Indian communities. In 1956, the decision to convert this force into Machine-Gun Regiments was taken, and the three battalions were merged with the Mahar Regiment, the only Indian Machine Gun Regiment in existence at the time. They joined the Regiment as the 4th, 5th and 6th Battalions of the Mahar Regiment, and it is to these units that the Regiment traces its mixed-class composition. The three Battalions style themselves battalions of the Mahar Regiment even today.
The class composition of the Regiment also changed. While 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 7th, 8th and 13th battalions were all pure Mahar battalions, the others were mixed classes right down to the smallest sub-unit level. The conversion training started in November 1963 with 1st Mahar and completed in May 1964 with 10th Mahar. The year 1965 saw all the battalions of the regiment gearing up for operations. These included the newly raised 11th and 12th battalions that had the unique composition of Bengalis, Oriyas and Gujratis - the communities that had been stamped as non-martial by the British. Their entry into the Mahar fraternity added strength to national integration-the distinctive feature which the regiment has always been proud of.
Battalions
साँचा:Indian Army Infantry Regimentsसाँचा:Https://youtu.be/cmXjoLPc0lg

ब्रिगेड ऑफ़ गार्डस • द पैराशूट रेजीमेंट • मेकनाईजड इन्फ़ेन्ट्री रेजीमेंट • पंजाब रेजीमेंट • मद्रास रेजीमेंट • बाम्बे ग्रेनेडियर्स • मराठा लाइट इन्फ़ेन्ट्री • राजपूताना राइफल्स • राजपूत रेजीमेंट • सिख रेजीमेंट • सिख लाइट इन्फ़ेन्ट्री • डोगरा रेजीमेंट • गढ़वाल रेजीमेंट• कुमाऊँ रेजीमेंट • असम रेजीमेंट • बिहार रेजीमेंट • मेहर रेजीमेंट • जम्मू कश्मीर राइफल्स • जम्मू कश्मीर लाइट इनफेन्ट्री • जाट रेजीमेंट • नागा रेजीमेंट • 1 गुरखा राइफल्स • 3 गुरखा राइफल्स • 4 गुरखा राइफल्स • 5 गुरखा राइफल्स • 8 गुरखा राइफल्स• 9 गुरखा राइफल्स • 11 गुरखा राइफल्स • लद्दाख स्काउट • सिक्किम स्काउट्स
