यह विश्व में प्रचलित क्षेत्रिय विवादों कि सूची है। बोल्ड दर्शित करता है:- दावेदार का पूर्ण नियँत्रण; इटैलिक्स दर्शाता है, दावेदार का आँशिक नियँत्रण।
580px|thumb|Territorial disputes in Europe 
The wikt:Antarctic Treaty System, formed on wikt:1 December wikt:1959 and entered into force on wikt:23 June wikt:1961, establishes the legal framework for the management of wikt:Antarctica and provides administration for the continent, which is carried out through consultative member meetings. It freezes the territorial claims of all signatories for as long as the treaty is in force. However, it is not a final settlement; parties can choose to withdraw from the System at any time. Furthermore, only a minority of states have signed it, and it is not formally sanctioned by the wikt:United Nations. Thus, Antarctica remains the only part of the planet any state can still lay claim to as wikt:terra nullius .
When the wikt:Constitution of the Republic of China was adopted on wikt:25 December wikt:1947, the wikt:Republic of China did recognize the statehood of the wikt:Mongolian People's Republic with Soviet pressure. After the wikt:UN General Assembly Resolution 505 was passed in 1952, the Republic of China withdrew such a recognition in 1953 and therefore claimed wikt:Greater Mongolia including wikt:Outer Mongolia. 
On wikt:26 November wikt:1993, the wikt:Judicial Yuan of the Republic of China in its Interpretation 328 called the constitutional territory beyond the reach of judicial review and thus avoided the question as whether Mongolia should be considered the constitutional territory of the Republic of China.
The Republic of China has once again recognized the statehood of wikt:Mongolia in 2002, thus freezing the territorial claim, but as the Constitution of the Republic of China still mentions Mongolia in Article 119 that has not been superseded by the Additional Articles of the Constitution of the Republic of China, there are different opinions as to whether such a recognition is constitutional. Despite these, the Yearbook of the Republic of China 2003 Version published by the wikt:Government Information Office does claim Outer Mongolia.
thumb|Map of the Republic of China with various territorial disputes
Over 1.5% of the world's population live in an area disputed by two countries that are members of the wikt:United Nations. This rises to around 25% when the areas and regions where territorial claims are made by two or more parties that do not recognize each other is included, although much of this comes from the wikt:Republic of China's claim to wikt:mainland China.
 Disputed or occupied territories
