वेब रंग वे रंग होते हैं, जो कि वेब पन्ने रूपांकन हेतु प्रयोग होते हैं। वेब रूपांकन के कर्ताओं के पास बहुत विकल्प होते हैं, इन रंगों को वेब घटकों का विवरण देने हेतु। इन्हें बताया जा सकता है जैसे षड्दशमलव रूपाकार में RGB ट्रिप्लेट। 
वेब रंग वे रंग होते हैं, जो कि वेब पन्ने रूपांकन हेतु प्रयोग होते हैं। वेब रूपांकन के कर्ताओं के पास बहुत विकल्प होते हैं, इन रंगों को वेब घटकों का विवरण देने हेतु। इन्हें बताया जा सकता है जैसे षड्दशमलव रूपाकार में RGB ट्रिप्लेट।
एक षड्दशमलव ट्रिप्लेट होता है एक छः अंक, तीन बाइट षड्दशमलव सँख्या, जो कि HTML में प्रयुक्त होती है रंगों के प्रदर्शन हेतु। तीनों बाइट दर्शाती हैं किसी एक रंग के लाल, हरा, नीला घटक। एक बाइट होती है 00 से FF तक, या 0 से 255 . This represents the least to the most intensity of each of the color components. The hex triplet is formed by concatenating three bytes in hexadecimal notation, in the following order: 
For example, consider the color where the red/green/blue values are decimal numbers: red=36, green=104, blue=160 . The decimal numbers 36, 104 and 160 are 24, 68 and A0 respectively in hexadecimal notation. To obtain the hex triplet, we simply write the three hex bytes together without spaces, thus: 2468A0. If a byte is less than 10 or 16 it must be represented with a leading zero to keep the number of digits in the triplet equal to six. For example, the decimal triplet 0,1,2 would be represented by the hex triplet 000102.
The number of colors that can be represented by this system is 
An abbreviated, three digit form is sometimes used. Expanding this form to the six-digit form is as simple as doubling each digit: 09C becomes 0099CC. This allows each color value to cover its full range from 00 to FF.
Converting a decimal RGB value to a hexadecimal value is fairly straightforward. Decimal RGB values are usually given in the 0-255 range; if they are in the 0-1 range, multiply the value by 255 before conversion. This number divided by 16 gives us the first hexadecimal digit . The remainder, times 16 again, gives us the second digit. For instance the RGB value 201 divides into 12 groups of 16, thus the first digit is C. A remainder of 9 gives us the hexadecimal number C9. This process is repeated for each of the three color values. Most modern operating systems have a built-in calculator to perform conversions between number bases and this can also be done with some hand-held calculators. This task can also be carried out using various web resources.
The HTML 4.01 specification defines sixteen named colors, as follows :
These 16 were also specified as sRGB and included in the HTML 3.0 specification which noted "These colors were originally picked as being the standard 16 colors supported with the Windows VGA palette."
In addition, a number of colors are defined by web browsers. A particular browser may not recognize all of these colors, but as of 2005 all modern general-use browsers support the full list. Many of these colors are from the list of X11 color names distributed with the X Window System. These colors were standardized by SVG 1.0, and are accepted by SVG Full user agents. They are not part of SVG Tiny.
Almost the exact same color names are used in .NET Framework, in the KnownColor and Color enumerations. The only color difference is DarkSeaGreen which is defined as 8F,BC,8B .
The list of web "X11 colors" from the CSS3 specification, along with their hexadecimal and decimal equivalents, is shown below, compare the alphabetical lists in the W3C standards.

साँचा:Color depthAnother set of 216 color values is commonly considered to be the "web-safe" color palette, developed at a time when many computer displays were only capable of displaying 256 colors. A set of colors was needed that could be shown without dithering on 256-color displays; the number 216 was chosen partly because computer operating systems customarily reserved sixteen to twenty colors for their own use; it was also selected because it allows exactly six shades each of red, green, and blue .

The "web-safe" colors do not all have names, but each can be specified by an RGB triplet. Below are the values for the 6 shades of each color out of 256 possible color shades.
The following table shows all of the "web-safe" colors, underlining the really-safe colors.The lack of gamma correction means that the six desired intensities 0%, 20%, 40%, 60%, 80%, and 100% are displayed as 0%, 2%, 10%, 28%, 57%, and 100% on a Windows standard 2.5 gamma CRT or LCD, making most colors very dark. The intensities at the low end of the range, especially 0 and 3, are nearly indistinguishable from each other:
Note that in the table below, each color code listed is a short-hand for the RGB value; for example, code 609 is equivalent to RGB code 660099.
The Cascading Style Sheets language defines the same number of named colors as the HTML 4 spec, namely the 16 listed previously.Additionally, CSS 2.1 adds the 'orange' color name to the list: 
CSS 2, SVG and CSS 2.1 also allow web authors to use so-called system colors, which are color names whose values are taken from the operating system. This enables web authors to style their content in line with the operating system of the user agent. As of early 2004, it appears that the CSS3 color module will once again drop these values, marking them deprecated, but this may change.
The developing CSS3 specification will also introduce HSL color space values to style sheets:
