We have Lord Hutton, the Americans have Bob Woodward. Both get the people who count to talk. While his lordship used the power of judicial summons, Woodward offers a deal. If you talk, he will faithfully present your side of the story. If you do not, your rivals will - and they'll end up looking good, often at your expense. That threat has persuaded Washington power brokers to cooperate on a series of bestselling Woodward books - and now it has worked its magic again to produce Plan of Attack, the inside story of the war against Iraq. Thanks to interviews with 75 key players, including on-the-record sessions with President Bush, as well as access to memos, transcripts of phone calls on secure lines (including those to Tony Blair), even Power Point presentations from military computers, this book is packed with the kind of high-grade information that traditionally stays hidden until the publication of memoirs years after the event. Here is the inside track on a crisis that is barely a year old and still unfolding. Woodward's style is not to present an overall analysis, still less a polemic, but simply to lay out the facts and viewpoints of the main actors. He rarely joins the dots, as those in the Bush administration might say. But it hardly matters: the dots themselves are compelling enough. What emerges is not only a fast-moving narrative of the build-up to war, but also a valuable resource - whatever your stance. If you reckon Bush is an intellectual featherweight barely up to the job, there is ammunition here - such as the January 2001 briefing at the Pentagon when the new president, not yet sworn in, struggles to pay attention to his generals: he is too distracted by the little peppermint at each place around the table. He gobbles up his own, then eyes those of the outgoing defence secretary and chief of staff until he has scoffed theirs too. On the other hand, there is rather more evidence leaning the other way - of a man fully in control. Those who believe Dick Cheney is the ventriloquist and Bush the dummy will be disappointed to read how hard Cheney pushed for the UN to be bypassed - and how Bush overruled him and went to the UN anyway (under pressure from Colin Powell and Blair). Indeed, the Bush that emerges on these pages is strikingly aware of his own role and status, constantly referring to himself by his title and emphasising the final power of his own decision. His closest aides seem intoxicated by that, too, as if playing out all the Oval Office movies they have ever seen: the grandeur of the office is almost sacral, to the extent that it can overwhelm them and cloud their judgment. Thus we learn not only that Bush never asked Powell whether he thought it was right to go to war with Iraq, but also that Powell never offered his opinion. "He would not intrude on that most private of presidential spaces - where a president made decisions of war and peace - unless he was invited." Even if he had, it's not likely he would have made much difference. For the theme that emerges most powerfully from this book is that this war was all but pre-ordained. Even before Bush was inaugurated, Cheney decided that "topic A" of the new president's first national security briefing should be Iraq. On Day 17 of the new administration, the "principals" met to discuss ... Iraq. The "axis of evil", we discover, was always about Iraq: North Korea and Iran were padding to make it look less obvious. When General Tommy Franks was charged with preparing a war plan, he was told that money was no object: he could spend whatever millions he wanted. Crucially, any countervailing evidence was ignored. Defectors told the CIA that the Iraqi military was so ragged that "Iraqi pilots were inventing illnesses on the days they were supposed to fly because they were terrified [their] inadequately maintained planes would crash". Yet Bush continued to tell the world that Saddam posed a military threat to the United States. In September 2002, during a meeting about possible targets, Franks gave it to Bush straight: "Mr President, we've been looking for Scud missiles and other weapons of mass destruction for 10 years and haven't found any yet." On every page comes evidence that Washington's mind was made up. No wonder Powell was "in the fridge," cold-shouldered by the inner circle. The rest of them were set on this course early, Bush taking Donald Rumsfeld aside and asking him to work on an Iraq war plan as early as November 2001. Powell is surely right to tell Woodward that Cheney was "terrified" of the UN route - lest it actually work and prevent war. This large theme carries others with it. One is the role of Tony Blair. Apart from reinforcing Powell on the UN, Woodward's account shows him to have secured little - save a delay here and there to help him win his vote in parliament. Woodward's picture of Blair is not flattering (next time he should make sure he's interviewed). In September 2002 he vowed to Bush that "I'm with you", pledging British military help even as he was telling close colleagues that no decisions had yet been taken. Publicly Blair insisted he was so passionate about ousting Saddam that he would have pushed for it even if Bush was not keen; yet Woodward quotes a Blair adviser admitting that of the three "axis" powers, the PM regarded Iran and North Korea as the greater threats. Most damaging of all - and a revelation that would surely have helped Lord Hutton in his inquiries - we discover that the head of the CIA regarded the notorious 45-minute claim as "shit" and had warned the British to that effect. Yet Downing Street went ahead and put the claim in the September dossier. In Woodward's account, the true special relationship is not with Britain but with Saudi Arabia. The kingdom's ambassador to Washington, Prince Bandar, is in and out of the Oval Office, granted extraordinary and constant access. Tellingly, he is the only person in the entire volume who talks back to Bush, interrupting him and even taunting him. That Bush takes it, and that Bandar is formally notified of the start of the war before Powell (or Blair), will have many wondering what exactly is the nature of the Saudi hold on the Bush administration. Woodward offers a tantalising clue: "The Saudis hoped to fine-tune oil prices ... to prime the economy for 2004. What was key, Bandar knew, were the economic conditions before a presidential election, not at the moment of the election." In other words, the Saudis were favoured because they were going to rig the global economy to ensure Bush a second term. Woodward's book has some heroes, too, in the form of the handful of Democratic senators who saw through the guff about WMD early. It has some splashes of colour, including the derring-do of a CIA team handing out wads of $100 bills in northern Iraq, and plenty to confirm that the Washington power bubble is one of the most dysfunctional places on earth. Bush goes to bed at 8.45pm; General Franks is at work by 3am; everyone phones every one else at 6am and Colin Powell takes a call from the French foreign minister to discuss the wording of a UN resolution 20 minutes before he is due to walk his daughter down the aisle. It all adds up to a volume as gripping as a bumper episode of The West Wing, with the added advantage that it's all true. Make that a disadvantage: for this book also confirms our worst fears, that the world's hyperpower is in the hands of a dangerous gang - and our own PM is with them every step of the way.