It is a commonplace that the our rail system is a disgrace. Reports on the competitiveness of the British economy cite transport as one of the key elements holding the country back. Surveys of foreign executives living in London inevitably report the rail system in particular and transport in general as the major blots on their quality of life compared with living elsewhere. British citizens, especially those living in London and the South-East, forced by high house prices to live ever further from their place of work, know that unreliable, expensive railways are the bane of their lives. The withdrawal of Connex's licence is the latest twist in a deepening crisis. It has long been obvious that the logistical challenge of running 1,800 trains a day on the most overcrowded part of the nation's suburban commuter system was beyond the company's managerial capability. The Strategic Rail Authority (SRA) had no choice but to act, triggered by its fears that Connex was inadequately accounting for its receipts of government subsidy.  Now, commuters face the hazards of their trains being run by an interim company cobbled together by the SRA for what may be a year or longer while it tries to find another company prepared to assume the challenge. At best, there will be no improvement in the service; at worst, it will deteriorate still further.  Defenders of the system say the SRA's action shows that it works. An inadequate company has been served warning that it stood to lose its licence unless it improved. It did not improve, so it lost its licence. Every other train operating company will now be on its mettle.  The truth is that if we want a great rail system, we have to have great organisations running it, organisations that are passionate about delivering a great service to their customers and passionate about being railwaymen and women. In the entire debate about the rights and wrongs of rail privatisation, this obvious point is all too rarely made.  The Conservative government under John Major created the current monstrosity because it genuinely believed that just the magic wand of being private and pursuing the profit motive would build dynamic rail organisations. New Labour has been paralysed in devising an alternative system because it genuflects to the same totemic set of beliefs.  If either government - and senior officials - had any understanding of business, they would know that successful businesses are, above all, successful organisations made dynamic by an over-riding sense of purpose at their core. The question that should be asked is whether the current structure of the rail system fosters the growth of great rail companies with such a passionate commitment and sense of purpose. The answer is an emphatic 'No'.  You cannot build a great rail company if you know that your licence to operate is temporary and if one of the key aspects of your success - the infrastructure of railways, stations and signalling - is outside your control. You are condemned to be a franchisee with a franchisee culture.  Some companies, for reasons of history or the particular steadfast attitude of their leadership, may manage to rise above the structure and try to build a great company. But most will collapse into short-termist, cynical price-gougers and rent-seekers employing a disaffected, demoralised and deskilled workforce. That, I'm afraid, characterises most of the rail industry - from the contractors plundering Network Rail with gargantuan margins to cynical train- operating companies hoping to maximise profits by running a just good enough service to avoid losing the licence, and not worrying overmuch about overcrowded trains, punctuality and the occasional fine.  What we want to create is either one company integrating infrastructure and train operation, like the old British Rail, or a series of regional companies that can be passionate about being rail operators in the best sense of the term - and whose leadership is suffused by the romance of rail transport and believes in the public benefits it brings.  Their stations in our big cities should be architectural wonders expressing that pride and belief; their trains and rolling stock should be at the technological frontier; their employees should be proud of what they do. Given that railways are natural monopolies and condemned by the expense of their infrastructure to run at a loss, the companies will have at least to be partially publicly owned or even constructed as public-interest companies, although you might be able to arrive at the same outcome by putting public-interest, non-executive directors on the boards of rail plcs. I'm unfussed ideologically about the detail as long as the overall structure permits us to grow the kind of rail companies we need.  But the national conversation has not got this far. We are in thrall to the tenets of capitalist primitivism - the axioms of the American Business Model - that what drives business is self-regarding greed, minimal government, powerless workers and keeping the share price high. The paradox is that not only do these propositions not deliver a successful capitalism, they don't even describe what happens in the US itself.  As economist John Kay remarks in his new book, The Truth About Markets, if you read the biographies of America's two richest capitalists - Bill Gates and Warren Buffet - what you quickly discover is that what animates both of them is not greed, financial incentives and keeping the share price high; rather, it's doing and building. Gates is passionate about technology and his multibillion dollar fortune at Microsoft is just the byproduct of that passion; Buffet believes in business-building and his fortune grows as his businesses grow.  What goes wrong is when business leaders believe the ideology that profit comes before the business's purpose; thus, in America, the disasters of Enron and WorldCom; thus, in Britain, the humbling of ICI and Marconi as they chased a high share price to the exclusion of all else.  Thus, a rail industry built not around a structure that creates great rail companies, but around the principle that profit, fines and withdrawal of licences are the essential building blocks in delivering an effective industry.  Great businesses are always great organisations animated by purpose and a desire to make a difference, and which know they need to enlist their workers to that cause. Get these fundamentals right and sustained profitability follows.  Government's task is not to be minimalist; rather, it is to create structures that enable business leaders to build great companies. The rail industry is a test case - and Connex's demise and the proposed solution show how very far we are from even beginning to pose the right questions, let alone answer them.