Last Wednesday, Windermere joined Derwentwater, Ullswater and Lake Coniston in having a 10mph speed limit. Good riddance to 70mph jet skis. And the 6,000 powerboats that use the lake will now have to move sedately up and down its 10-mile length. It's a landmark moment in Lake District life. All the great English lakes will now conform to the National Parks' idea of what constitutes tranquillity. Part of me is pleased; the lake will become much more friendly to canoes, kayaks and sailing boats. I've never understood the attraction of powerboats - SUVs on water - and their owners' screw-the-rest-of-you desire to make testosterone-charged bow waves with as much commotion as possible.  But another part of me rebels against the new rule and the drive for 'tranquillity' that justifies it. I'm not sure that Windermere should be tranquil. For all my dislike of powerboats and jet skis, we surely have the obligation to find some corner of one of our National Parks for them and Windermere was the last redoubt. It's another small curtailment of freedom and this blind desire to conserve saps our energy and capacity to express ourselves for the wrong reasons.  The more I walk in and get to know the Lake District, the more concerned I have become that those who love these hills - I include myself- have become far too indiscriminate in their resistance to any form of change or improvement, especially if it involves new building. An upsurge in quarrying, as Roy Hattersley reported last week from the Peak District, is obviously destructive. So is building lavish, ugly holiday sites or swaths of car parks.  But this proper suspicion of some development has become a fetishistic obstruction to every form of modernity, freezing the Lake District in a kind of 1950s time warp. We admire Wordsworth's Dove Cottage and the Victorian granite pavilions brooding beside Grasmere, but our generation's contribution to the architectural legacy is going to be negligible.  There may not be a single building along the whole of the east coast of Coniston Water, but that is how it must stay in perpetuity. It's almost as if time stopped when the National Park was created in 1951  The contrast with Switzerland could hardly be more marked. The Swiss love their mountains and lakes as ardently as any defender of the Lake District, but they don't attempt to stop the clock. Rather, they embrace modernity to make natural beauty more beautiful still and they actively encourage people to make a living in their hills.  Footpaths are lovingly tended and signposted; farmhouses sell cider, snacks and soft drinks to passing walkers; vast underground car parks are constructed to keep tourist cars out of sight. New architecture is celebrated; recently built houses and flats cost more than those 10 or 20 years old because they are so better designed and modern. But at the same time, the Swiss carefully regulate quarrying, mining and dam-building and even the use of cars. Zermatt famously requires visitors to leave their cars outside the town and enter by electric taxis and buses.  A Swiss approach to the Lake District would radicalise its use. For a start, we would build substantial underground car parks at all the key entry points to the park and then offer a choice of electric buses, trams, taxis and trains to all the key start points for major walks and tourist attractions. There would be a drive to upgrade all the hotels, bars and restaurants and those not making the grade would lose their licence. Footpaths would be well signposted (we nearly got lost on a clear sunny day on the Langdale Pikes because a footpath marked on the map inexplicably turned into a directionless sheep track).  Each year, a limited amount of new building, alongside renovation of the derelict, would be permitted and not restricted to those with a three-year residency qualification. The proposition, for example, that the rotting 1930s prefab you see as you walk into Elterwater should be preserved for all time because no locals have the money or interest in building better or more imaginatively would strike the Swiss as risible. In Britain, the suggestion that it could be pulled down and replaced with something that expresses the best of us - and by people who live outside the Lake District - is resisted to the last.  As a result, the underlying economy of the Lakes is becoming grievously unbalanced. Farmers are desperate to diversify but can't; the best hoteliers can't expand; those with new ideas are trapped by incumbents refusing to budge. But don't think of changing a thing or renovating one single room without going through a planning permission procedure biased to negativism and encountering universal hostility.  This is a barren, defensive and joyless view of the world, but one of the reasons it's so widespread and virulent is that so much public and private development over the years has been so ghastly. Too many private developers have the 'screw you' attitude of a powerboat user, careless of the crap they leave behind. Better nothing than that.  But the bigger story is that our National Park authorities could give a more enlightened lead if they were constitutionally equipped to do so and armed with adequate financial resource. The trouble is that we embed conservatism in what we ask them to do and don't give them the budgets to aim any higher. If we want underground car parks and a system of environmentally friendly public transport, it costs money. If we want them to challenge private developers in the courts, that costs money, too.  And if we want a more generous Swiss-style approach to conservation, recognising that some new developments are brilliant expressions of today, we need to mandate them to plan for it.  But that requires some cultural change in British society. The three-year residency requirement is part of the same hostility to the other represented by quotas on immigrants and asylum seekers; it's hardly a surprise racist attacks are exploding in our rural areas. That comes from insecurity and defensiveness. If we were more confident about the contemporary and the opportunities of the modern, and more certain about who we British are, we would have a healthier national culture and one better able to find the balance between the demands of the modern and Nature.  And that, in turn, requires a richer national conversation in which all the phenomena that connect - insecurity, inequality, distrust of the new, disbelief that private ambitions can have public benefits and scepticism about the effectiveness of any public action - are openly talked about and resolutions sought. That requires politicians prepared to dare and citizens prepared to respond. Until then, to dream about the Lake District celebrating modernity is just that, a dream.