Four European leaders jointly hailed last week the arrival of a piece of frontier technology that will transform the lives of millions and has created and will continue to create tens of thousands of jobs. That it was all through an act of European co-operation does not fit the British script. Matters European are, by definition, a failure, bureaucratic, job-destroying and futile. Success is American. Yet the A380 Airbus, unveiled in Toulouse last Tuesday, is a bit of a problem for Eurosceptics. Here is a 550-seater, double-decker aircraft that will ferry passengers in the same volumes as a big express train with breakthrough levels of fuel efficiency and at half the noise levels. Already terminals round the world are being enlarged; the technologically advanced A380, with its Rolls-Royce Trent 900 engines and British wings, is going to transform and cheapen air travel, accelerating the pace of globalisation and making the world smaller just as the Boeing 747 once did. It's a European project that works, while breaking a former US monopoly.  Yet there's a background chorus of criticism, even mockery; the plane could never have been built without government subsidy, will pollute the world with yet more air travel and is doomed to be a white elephant. And it's all based on a misconception. People don't want to fly cheaply in sky trains from big city to big city; they want to fly in smaller aircraft from regional city to regional city. And the appetite for air travel is slowing down.  I think the criticism is wrong on every count. Airports have already outstripped traditional seaports as centres of both travel and economic activity; the runway in the 21st century is playing the same critical role as docks and wharves did in the 19th, the driver of economic development and urban energy alike.  What's more, people are increasingly on the move. Businessmen and women, scientific researchers and even the ordinary holidaymaker are all attracted by the cornucopia of opportunity opened up by globalisation.  Big city airports are forming a global network and the world needs big planes to move people between them. The days in which most people never moved more than five miles from where they were born are a thing of the distant past - and good riddance to them.  In this respect, the A380 is Europe's gift to the world rather as the Jumbo was America's 35 years ago. But no one country or company could have accepted the risk. From inception to launch, it has cost some £9.5 billion to develop, which as long as it boosts its sales from the current 149 to more than 300 should be recouped. At £150 million a plane, the auguries are good, but another terrorist attack or unforeseen technical failure could still threaten its viability. On the other hand, if passenger numbers continue to grow exponentially, the market could be a 1,000 planes or more, replacing the Boeing 747 as the workhorse of the next 20 years,in which case the A380 could become one of the most profitable industrial projects in history. My hunch is that this is what is set to happen.  And Britain, via its shareholding held by BAE Systems, will be a beneficiary, although BAE reportedly is considering selling the potential goldmine on which it is sitting because, strategically, it wants to dissociate itself from Europe and integrate into the US market. Probably Britain's worst-run industrial enterprise, this would finally consign it to the dustbin, but its endemically weak strategic thinking seems to be infected by the same Euroscepticism that propels Ukip, the Conservatives and Labour's Empire Loyalists, even when it's directly against its shareholders interests.  In a choice between being a low-level subcontractor to US industry or trying risk sharing in European aerospace and defence projects - the costs and risks are too overwhelming to go it alone - BAE Systems can be relied upon to opt unhesitatingly for the US option.  Indeed, the fact that Britain has a stake in Airbus at all is against the odds; Labour Eurosceptics, lead by then minister of technology Tony Benn, dropped our original 37.5 per cent Airbus stake in 1969 to chase what seemed like superior American collaboration. But when it became obvious that all that was on offer was the kind of subordinate contracting still offered today, Prime Minister Callaghan rejoined in 1978 but with a reduced 20 per cent shareholding.  As an act of indecision, it has cost Britain billions of pounds of lost work and condemned us to a junior role in world civil aerospace. The consolation is that it could have been worse; if the arguments were rerun in today's ruinous Eurosceptic climate it would have been.  For not even the once mighty Boeing can fund the kind of risks inherent in big civilian aerospace projects. Famously, it wagered the company in the late 1960s by committing $6bn in today's money to build and develop the 747; it was a natural gamble from a company then committed to engineering excellence.  But without support from the then rich US airlines and their government-rigged price structure, a dodgy system of tax rebates for export sales and lush grants from the Pentagon for aerospace research, even Boeing couldn't have thrown the dice.  As it was. it very nearly went under, and after being the object of an attempted asset-stripping takeover bid in 1987, its new priority became maximising shareholder value rather than building innovative planes. And it has being going downhill as a centre of engineering and research excellence ever since. Last year, Airbus outsold it for the second year running.  What European governments are doing by supporting up to a third of Airbus's costs through long-term repayable grants, the object of a long-standing vitriolic trade row with the US, is playing the role of long-term, patient and engaged owner that today's peripatetic, short-term shareholders will not do.  The cycle of investment and return in the A380 will take a generation. Even if we had aerospace entrepreneurs of the vision and patience of William Boeing today, the scale of the investment would be beyond them. Governments have to step in to close the market failure over time and scale; without them, the A380 couldn't have happened either in Europe or the US.  And no European government is large enough to go it alone, forcing them into collaboration, and the vehicle they have is the European Union. As with civil aerospace, so with defence and, as we have seen recently with the Huygens space probe to Titan, space.  It is a sign of how debased the debate over Europe now is that last week too few leading politicians, businessmen or commentators chose to put their head above the parapet and argue the merits of European collaboration.  There could be more examples to join the A380 if we wanted, but our preferred place is to be the US's political and industrial poodle, costing us money, jobs, technology and pride. It's a very special British tragedy.