Camberley is another one of those familiar dormitory towns that punctuate the south-east of England. Yet turn through the big gates that loom off the A30, and suddenly you are in a different world. The colonnades of the old Sandhurst building sprawl out before you: train your eye to the right and there is the new Sandhurst. This is Britain's campus for army leadership - the world famous college that, for some 200 years, has been grooming the British army's officer corps. It has been a switchback 18 months for the army and its leadership. It has gone from the highs of Lt Col Tim Collins inspirational 'We go to liberate, not conquer' speech to his troops and the heroism of Trooper Finney, the youngest soldier ever to win the George Cross for bravery, to the lows of troops being investigated for the alleged murder of at least one Iraqi prisoner, with further allegations of abuse and torture from the Queen's Lancashire Regiment. Sandhurst values are under test.  But Mirror editor Piers Morgan famously lost the battle between his word and that of an army officer over photographs purporting to show the abuse; his denouement took a matter of hours. It was the moral ferocity of the army's sense of injustice that did for him; an ex-commander saying the ego of a newspaper editor could not be set against the life of a soldier perfectly caught the mood. It was inadmissible journalism that had perhaps irreparably and certainly unfairly damaged the army's reputation. But there was more. There was a national subliminal understanding that a moral code had been transgressed; paradoxically, organised military violence is built on a series of moral relationships that you undermine at your peril. Morgan had carelessly and insouciantly crossed the line.  The British army is one of Britain's institutions that unambiguously works. Its enemies, like the Russians during the Cold War, pay it the compliment in their exercises of insisting on having overwhelming force when they simulate attacks on British positions. It has also earned a formidable reputation for peace-keeping. And Sandhurst is the academy on which all this turns. The military doctrine it teaches rests on the battlefield need for adaptability, speed of response and the maintenance of what military planners call 'tempo' - now honed into the concept, borrowed from the nineteenth-century Prussian army under Von Moltke, of 'mission command'.  As Col Harry Hanscomb, director of Sandhurst's leadership programme, explained to me, the army organises itself around objectives, with individual officers being allowed maximum latitude to decide how the achievement of an objective can be secured in the light of battlefield conditions. Thus adaptability; speed of response; tempo. Trooper Finney was operating in an environment where thinking for yourself about how to achieve a common goal is embedded in the culture.  It's a doctrine that works, but what successive generations of army leaders impress on their officers - and what the courses at Sandhurst are built on - is that 'mission command' makes sense only within a culture of maximum trust, and that, in turn, depends on the chain of command itself, culminating in the direction of soldiers on the ground, adhering solidly to value-based relationships.  Hanscomb lists the principles of 'officership': commitment, mutual trust and self-sacrifice. The army is built on convincing men and women willingly to follow an officer into terrifying situations where they might lose their lives; it is hardly surprising that it has given a lot of thought about how to do it. Its answer is embodied in Sandhurst's motto: Serve to Lead.  This is standard stuff in the voluminous literature about leadership, but what makes Sandhurst's less platitudinous is that you know it has to mean business. For 12 months, it puts its officer cadets through testing simulated actions, feeds back to them what they did wrong and expects them to learn - but all the time insisting that the job of leaders is unambiguously to establish objectives, achieve common intent through moral relationships of integrity and then delegate.  Nor is this approach confined to the army. At Shrivenham in Wiltshire, the Defence Leadership Centre does the same for all the armed services. Unified command for operations combining land, sea and air requires at strategic level a redoubled commitment to every one sharing what the military calls unity of purpose - and then delegating to individual commanders within that framework. As Col Brian Watters, who runs the centre, told me, the high-tech battlefields of the twenty-first century require even more delegation and emphasis on mission command - which makes it even more important that everyone shares the same values and can be trusted to make the right judgments.  The more you learn about the army's approach to leadership, the more you realise how connected it is to the civilisation of which it is part. You can't have common intent if there is little common intent in the wider society; you can't construct trust if the wider society is trust-free; you can't insist on service or that the Geneva Conventions count if these beliefs are mocked in the world beyond. Hanscomb believes that the supply of basic officer material with which the army works is the best it has ever been; if so, it's a commentary that British society is in a healthier condition than the media commenteriat allows.  IT IS ALSO A COMMENTARY on American society that it has created the values that its military has displayed in Iraq. Privatisation - and the urge to do anything in the public realm on the cheap - has left the US over-reliant on reservists who adhere to a wider American value system over-ready to rely on brutalism and belief that the US is beyond the rule of law to achieve its objectives. The leaked report into prison abuse in Iraq shows an American officer class that is dysfunctional, wherein relationships of integrity have almost completely broken down.  Once you regard the Geneva Conven tions as applying only to other armies - as the US under President Bush does, you have, as British army officers claim, left behind the universe of values in which you create the trust relationships on which crucial military competences, such as delegated leadership, depend. Prisoner abuse matters not only because of the human rights violations, but also because of the explicit dysfunctionality it spells for your own army's value system.  But Britain has its own cases of prisoner abuse, which the army claims are isolated - in part, because it believes the Sandhurst system works - and which it is determined to root out because of the implications for the entire structure.  If abuse were systemic, the whole fabric of values on which mission command and 'Serve to Lead' are rounded comes crashing to the ground, and with them the army's combat effectiveness. The army has to believe abuse is isolated - and it must successfully correct any abuse it finds. British society cannot pretend the army's concerns are not our own. We are linked by the same golden thread. Its strengths - as well as its problems - are ours. Will Hutton