There must be votes in mobility. It doesn't take a Commons Select Committee to tell us, as it did last week, that rush-hour travelling by rail and Tube has become inhumane, while our roads are close to gridlock. Our daily experience confirms the appalling reality; moving around Britain is expensive, difficult and profoundly unpleasurable. Worse, we learned on Friday that matters have reached such a pass that even with a determined response it will be 10 years before rail travel is as reliable as it was in the unreliable late 1990s! Some notes from my own diary last week: Tuesday evening: to my daughter's parents evening. A signal has failed at Embankment station; no tubes North or South are running. The only way to make it is by taxi; price - a cool £20. I arrive late.  Thursday morning: to Manchester from Euston. The Tube again has failed, with big crowds backing up; to make the 9am train I have to insert myself on the Underground that does arrive - an overcrowded cattle-truck. I arrive at Euston at 8.57, heart pounding, trying against the odds to be stoic but run up the escalators to try to make the train with seconds to spare. Shouldn't have worried. The incoming train has not arrived. We finally leave at 9.30 am.  So it continued - a week of late arrivals, discomfort, and general tumult, with honourable staff profusely apologising and explaining. I have the privilege of letting off steam in this column; most citizens just suffer in daily silence. Yet every week millions are missing the big occasions in their children's lives, arriving late for appointments if at all and trying to come to terms with how indifferent the transport system is to wasting their time in delays, traffic jams, and cancellations - as Juliette Jowit so accurately reports today.  The whole thing is barely credible. Transport is the collective good above any other. It is something we pay for, borrow for and plan collectively; its benefits are shared by all. To promote individual choice, low taxes and constrained public investment is to condemn Britain to physical immobility. That we still lack any high-speed trains - or any immediate prospect of them - in the era of high-speed rail is tribute to our chronic and systemic deficiencies; in part a legacy of a system of public finance that is bizarrely biased against public investment and partly because our political leaders genuflect to American conceptions of the primacy of individual choice and private endeavour - recipe for transport deadlock on a small, overcrowded European island.  Except, this week, maybe - just maybe - help is at hand. The establishment of Network Rail, a not-for-dividend public-interest company, in place of the ghastly and incompetent Railtrack, while retaining the powerful Rail Regulator has for tuitously created an institutional nexus with the power and ambition to drive through improvement. The Government is constitutionally obliged to accept the Regulator's orders; Network Rail, if all else fails, has the power to borrow to meet the investment needs the Regulator sanctions. For the first time in recent British transport history we have a structure biased for investment rather than against it - something for which the Labour Government has received too little credit even if the policy has happened through a series of accidents than by design.  Network Rail, after it had taken over Railtrack's assets last year, undertook the thorough audit and assessment of their condition that amazingly Railtrack had barely attempted. Its findings were horrific, effectively doubling the amount required to create a rail network minimally fit for its purpose. How would the Government respond?  In the old days of British Rail it could have shrugged off such a demand because it owned the industry; thus too little investment and too late. When privatised Railtrack subsequently made a similar demand, there was necessarily a negotiation because as a private company committed to maximising shareholder value it couldn't accept the default position of borrowing the cash itself if it failed to displace the cost on to the Government and the rail operating companies; again it had to compromise. But today is different. The investment recommended by the Rail Regulator will happen; the issue is with what combination of higher fares, tax revenue and higher borrowing it will be financed - because in the last resort Network Rail can borrow, constrained, unlike Railtrack or BR, only by what the financial markets will bear. Rescue has come in the nick of time; thousands of miles of our 20,000-mile rail system are in effect time-expired - Railtrack renewed and modernised less than 200 miles a year, down from BR's 500 miles a year, and even then allowed the costs to spiral out of control by allowing subcontractors virtually to charge what they liked. Network Rail has raised the modernised mileage to over 700 miles a year and is painfully trying to bring the subcontractor's sky-high margins down by doing the work itself; a case where public enterprise is so palpably more efficient than private enterprise it should provoke a national rethink. Tom Winsor, the Rail Regulator, wants this renationalisation of contracting to continue to bring down costs. He has slashed Network Rail's bid by £10 billion below what it wanted in the five years to 2009 while still asking it to achieve the same objectives - but even so it will spend £8bn more than planned in the Railtrack era.  Winsor's report and decision are interim; they will be finalised by December. Alistair Darling, Secretary of State for Transport, can argue for more efficiency savings or that the system should cease to carry freight; but the last word resides with Winsor - and he backs the investment case. He accepts that Network Rail can borrow half the cash he has permitted it to spend, raising its borrowing to a stunning 2 per cent of GDP in 2009; the rest will have to come from higher fares or taxes.  It is not a bad prospect - as long as the Conservatives do not get elected in 2005 and 2009, with their predisposition to turn the clock back to the world of privatisation and private contracting that has caused the crisis. But it will not be before 2014 that delays will be lower than in 1999 and Britain will possess a modernised rail infrastructure - a measure of the depth of our transport crisis. Nor will it be cheap.  To complete an improved picture we need new roads, congestion charges and taxes on oversized cars - all areas where the Government is showing encouraging signs of movement. We baby boomers will be approaching our old-age pension, but in our dotage there is just a chance we may be able to move round our country in a manner we never could in our middle age. Don't hold your breath, though. Even that modest result requires political courage and sustained investment. If the future is like the past, increasing immobility is just as likely. But here's hoping.