Public? Private? The unions - and Labour's own backbenchers - are getting ready for a long, hot autumn. Tony Blair chokes over his enchiladas in Cancun while, back home in the Brighton foothills, the forces of Unison play Zapatistas. This is supposedly the core, the defining debate - and we liberal types think we know where our (public) duty lies. But then, so did General Sir David Ramsbotham, lately aide-de-camp general to the Queen and, even more lately, HM's chief inspector of prisons.  Sir David (Haileybury and Corpus Christi, Cambridge) is an unlikely Guardian hero, just like his predecessor, Judge Stephen Tumim (St Edward's School and Worcester College, Oxford). The old establishment lives. And yet this establishment has sharp teeth, not dentures. Conditions in Feltham B - the section for 18 to 21-year-olds - are "utterly disgraceful", Sir David wrote in his final report a few days ago. ("Final" because a craven Home Office hasn't extended his contract). After a racist murder in a cell, after yet another suicide, after a riot of frustration, the appalling problems which "I have consistently drawn attention to over the last five years remain as bad, if not worse, as they ever did".  Treasury resources have flowed in; little by way of improvement has flowed out. Ramsbotham straightens his ramrod back one more time. Unless, he says, there's a miracle by December 2001 at the latest, then "I have to recommend that responsibility for the custody of young prisoners in Feltham B should be withdrawn from the prison service and passed to the private sector." The minister responsible for almost everything, Beverley Hughes, postpones watching Brass Eye and agrees. More privatisation - this time of western Europe's biggest youth jail - looms.  And then there's an eerie silence. Bill Morris, John Edmonds and the legions of public defenders have nothing to say. Could it be that they've read Sir David's report? "On a number of occasions I have drawn attention to the malign influence of individual members of the Prison Officers Association...who mount a ritual and continuous challenge to legitimate management and present a consistent obstacle to planned and essential improvements. Nowhere has this been more apparent or reprehensible than in Feltham. I challenge them to state publicly whether or not they would be happy for their sons to be submitted to the regime they seem to think it appropriate to impose on vulnerable and impressionable young people."  Strong stuff? We've barely started - and it's vital to continue. Why did that mini-riot (or "serious disturbance") start? Because of an "inflexible insistence on conditions determining when evening association can be provided, an inflexibility that leads to frequent short notice cancellation. Management has reluctantly agreed to a motion from the POA which quite clearly puts the impact of evening working on its members before the needs of young prisoners. The culture is expressed through the actions of the POA committee, whose constant demand for more staff and more overtime is no more than public exposure of their refusal to be realistic and work with management."  Even while the inspectors were inside Feltham, "we witnessed an inordinate amount of management time being taken up by a trivial issue about the amount of paid duty time that locally elected POA officials should be allowed to spend on POA matters." The committee was, in effect, an "alternative management". That's surely not "the spirit of partnership" the association claims to champion? Surely the national executive committee should condemn it?  You may, or may not, be amazed to hear that the national executive has issued no such condemnations. To the contrary. The director general of the prison service has compulsorily transferred the chairman of Feltham POA to a computing job at headquarters "because he's a block on sensible change". The union is going to law to fight the "illegal removal of a trade union official". Time to take a step back and draw a deep breath. What, in theory, could more closely encapsulate the true ethos of public service than our prisons and the dedication of the men and women (often heroic) who work within them? If society can't take care of punishment and rehabilitation, who can?  Yet gradually, over the years, any such claim by any home secretary has slithered into red-faced silence. In these closed worlds of producers without pressure and consumers without a choice, things have been done in our name of which we should be miserably ashamed. Did you know that the suicide rate of prisoners in Tony Blair's jails is 12 times the rate of the prisoners in George Bush's? Did you know that the director general of the prison service "quite frankly does not have an explanation" why this should be so?  Did you know (calling David Ramsbotham again) that "private prisons have been delivering, by and large, a far higher standard of treatment for prisoners than the public sector"? That the terms of their "compliance monitor" tend to be far more demanding than those in the public sector? "For example, all private prisons have to provide at least 30 hours of purposeful activity per prisoner each week, as opposed to the public sector's target of 24 hours - which in reality is often less and has been progressively lowered over the past three years."  We talk of democratic deficits. Here's the archetypal one. Crime shifts votes at elections: what happens to those convicted of crime doesn't. They are shut away in a voter void of forgetfulness - punctuated only by Jonathan Aitken telling us what Lord Archer could expect in Belmarsh or the voices of retribution consigning Thompson and Venables to Feltham B. We rely on Michael Howard or Jack Straw. The inspector of prisons - a real public servant - delivers five coruscating reports about Feltham and about the "children" who suffer within it, and "little or nothing" is done.  Five Feltham governors, two of them temporary, come and go within a year. It is a scandal to put other surface scandals - yes, like the Dome - in the shade. A racist cellmate kills an innocent young man. Kids on remand, not even convicted, are locked up to rot without the fulfilled "duty of care". The prison service, says its DG with admirable frankness, is "institutionally racist".  Yet there is no gale-force for change. These are second-hand problems on the outside; too few of us care. The politicians move crab-like, never confronting blocks to change like the POA; rather chipping them away by a privatisation which is intended to disguise the feebleness of failure. A debate in Brighton? Fine. Lines drawn on hospitals and schools, where the consumer as elector rules OK? Fine. But when I think of Feltham B I shiver, for it tells us something deep and dismaying about the nature of the human beast.