A sleepy, deserted city: but along the Vauxhall-to-Lewisham corridor, there's political ferment. More action, more posters, more passion, than at any time during June's election. The natives are revolting. Labour and Tories have joined them, standing shoulder to shoulder. Thousands sign the petitions. This 185 bus initiative must not pass.  What? A little local row about London bus lanes? Where's the greater metropolitan, let alone national, interest in that? Even the London Evening Standard finds such parochial matters beneath its reporting dignity. But hang around, from Leeds to Aberdeen, because the pending big issue is already beginning to putrefy on Mayor Livingstone's mat and drift towards Downing Street. We're talking disintegrating transport policy.  Every voter, of course, wants an integrated transport policy. (It's like motherhood and summer pudding.) Londoners especially like the sound of it. Give them a Mori pollster, hired by Ken, to chat to and they embrace the vision of better, faster buses, trains and trams seamlessly connecting in some nirvana of cheap, instant travel. But what does all this generalised pie mean when it drops out of the sky?  Back to the Lewisham corridor. Mr Livingstone, going boldly where British politician has never trod before, is only 18 months or so away from creating his central congestion charge zone (£5 a day to drive into the middle of London: an £80 fine if you cheat or forget). But first, because he's a politician, he has first to offer the punters a few modest improvements: gain before pain.  Such token boons, though, are not available on the tube, where so far only the lawyers have got rich. Therefore - priority two on his Mori poll - he's into bus reliability and the creation of 27 "busPlus" routes, featuring 24-hour stopping clearways, rigidly segregated lanes and their inevitable handmaidens, CCTV cameras. The 185 upgrade is one such plus.  Who could possibly be against all this, against speedier journeys and more pleasant bus-stop environments with flashing screens to tell when the next double-decker to Victoria is due? The answer, alas, seems to be almost everybody.  East Dulwich, at the heart of the corridor, is the much poorer cousin of Dulwich Village. It used to be flyblown. It has clawed its way up over 20 difficult years, gradually building a bustling community around half-a-mile of small, non-chain shops and restaurants and learning - through diversity - to survive in the long shadow of yet another giant Sainsbury's. But along the central strand, the Greeks and Turks and Pakistanis and Indians and Thais and Chinese who give the place its flavour believe that the busPlus lanes and cameras will wipe them out. The passing trade from miles around which means survival will head for the supermarket's concrete acres and never return. This is make or break.  More nimbyism? Strike up the not in my backyard band? Of course: that's one way of putting it. But the secret of London is that it's not just a conventional downtown ringed by anonymous dormitories, but a higgledy-piggledy collection of villages with separate identities. And if country villages need their shops, why should urban villages be different? Is constant video surveillance with hot and cold parking wardens the solution, or the beginning of another social problem?   I ask the question because the hard answer comes ever closer. There is no transport gain without transport pain. John Prescott found that out through the years of thumb-sucking when he wasn't minding Tony's shop. Mayor Ken must have already discovered the trouble he's in. The last government report on congestion charging, 10 years ago, put the idea on the shelf "because the charges would be unenforcable unless there was a general acceptance amongst those who had to pay them". Mori, a decade on, finds that "half of those polled supported the scheme, with four in 10 opposed". But the biggest majority (57%) came from people inside the zone. So outside opinion looks distinctly dodgy.  When Ken put his scheme to consultation, 19 unspecified organisations supported it and only three came out against. But the devil, as ever, is in the detail - in the 147 organisations listed as "supporting, with caveats". Ah! those caveats again. Motorbike riders are in favour as long as the charge doesn't involve them. (And they've won, because the zone entry cameras can't see their number plates). Taxi drivers are in favour as long as they can charge more for evening fares. Tube staff are in favour as long as they don't have to run trains through the night. Pedestrian groups want more beacon crossings to slow down the speeded-up buses. And so on.  Does anyone, for instance, quite realise that the "centre" on Ken's map ends at Park Lane (thus excluding Knightsbridge, Chelsea, Notting Hill and similar fragrancies) but includes some of the mean streets of Bermondsey and the Elephant and Castle? South London councils do and inquire where the sense or fairness in that lies. The concept of an "inner ring road" arouses profound incredulity. An inner ring up the Edgware Road by 2003? The ticketing wizardry that brought you the first night of the Dome but deployed at hundreds of zonal entry points? Incredulity reigns.  You and I, suitably detached in pundit or observer mode, may feel impatience over such doubts and sorrows. Surely a greater imperative rules OK. Surely the new mayor deserves his trail-blazing chance to reclaim London from the curse of the motorcar. If he wins, after all, then many more British cities, like Leeds, will swiftly follow his lead. And Something (as all we retired leader writers know) Must Be Done.  But the moment of truth is also the moment when the caveats run out. So far Mr Livingstone has had the politics on his side. How could battling Gordon over London Underground financing produce any other outcome? Even Trafalgar Square pigeons would vote for him. Now, however, the real war approaches in a rush of deadlines: 2002 for busPlus, 2003 for charging. He wants his congestion zone because (among other things) it gives him £200m of his "own" money. Without it, he's in total hock to the Treasury. But the downside of failure is political humiliation, with Downing Street smiling behind its hand and saying that, of course, dear old Frank Dobson would never have endorsed such a debacle. Politics is a two-edged sword. It will cut the whole mayoral experiment to pieces given a chance.  Down in East Dulwich on a drenching Sunday, the issues are pitta and ghee and the posters in the windows glower balefully. Who, toughened with the cynicism that Ken knows so well, wants to venture a mild prediction? That timetables will slip. That the zone will somehow come after the next mayoral election. That this bus, like so many before it, will not leave on time?