Over there, they bury one great communicator and talk reverently of his unquenchable optimism. Over here, we bury (or bruise with some brutal kicking) our own wonderfully fluent communicator, glowering balefully at his targets and touted achievements. Optimism? Forget it. Labour, like the Tories, takes a Euro-pounding. Only the bleakest, sourest pessimism will do.  And yet, looking at last night's extreme convulsions, setting them alongside some memorably awful local election results, you have to wonder what the Gipper would make of it all. A shrug, a grin, a scratch of the luxuriantly coiffed head. He liked to keep things simple. He couldn't stand too many darned nuances. Gee whiz, what on earth's gone wrong? Now there's a poser to get Nancy calling for her necromancer.  Something's curdled, something's crocked. But set out to learn the supposed lessons of this mortification, and it's a thin list of tired old mutually contradictory numbers. Which particular lessons were you thinking of, sir?  Is it that great and abiding lesson - the lesson as preached by Peter Hain and Robin Cook and Clare Short - which renounces the Iraq invasion with unforgiving passion and blames Blair for staying too close to George Bush? Or the lesson as preached by Ukip and the Tories, which effectively says that we don't want a European foreign policy, can't stomach foreigners' cowardly neutralism on terror and must therefore (in logic) be free and independent enough to choose to cuddle closer to him? You can have one lesson, but you can't have both.  What was the supposed doorstep dirge of Bassetlaw and Newcastle-upon-Tyne? Iraq, Iraq, Iraq. Yet who suffered Europe's most swingeing local defeat of 2004, bar none? Yes, Jacques Chirac and Jean-Pierre Raffarin, trounced in 19 of the 22 regions of France, humiliated, and battered again last night. Wipe-out doesn't have to wear a hair shirt or a burka. Wipe-out is a plague on every house along the street.  And so it goes. Do you like the lesson that wants something done about congestion, or the lesson that punishes Mayor Ken for doing something about it? The lesson that heaves with fury over petrol prices, or the lesson that gives the Greens a big leg up? The Respect lesson exalting tolerance in a complex, multi-ethnic society, or the BNP lesson that chucks a brick through the nearest Pakistani window? The lesson that hands the Lib Dems big gains in the north, or the lesson that takes away Cheltenham and Eastbourne again? The lesson that punishes leaders for spending too much time abroad, or the lesson that kicks Jack McConnell for putting Scottish golf before Normandy duty?  Maybe most of all, on last night's whimsical form, do you revere the lesson that shuffles Michael Howard to the top of the pack on Thursday, a king of hearts allegedly in Downing Street waiting, then pushes him back to play knave of spades on Sunday because Robert Kilroy-Silk, Joan Collins, Simon Heffer, Jonathan Aitken et al must have their fleeting moment of glory?  The only simple lesson, the lesson Ronnie might absorb and burnish, is that there is no lesson. Maybe the voter is always right, but the voters we have - right across Europe - have lost rectitude's plot.  In Poland, they vote to join up for the EU one month, then vote in ridiculous numbers - over 30% - to pull out the next. Who doesn't want the EU we have? Jean-Marie Le Pen and the Spanish Communist party, Slovakian nationalists and Maltese socialists. There is no rhyme or reason here, and it is a growing disservice to common sense to believe that any such rationality exists. Our incoherence is endemic now. It overturns prophesy and hammers sitting governments everywhere. It drives Tony Blair from pillar to post. It is the European norm, political global warming. Yes, but is it final?  At which point, perhaps, the Gipper would smile one of his winsome smiles and shrug again. Ah, optimism! What are you guys going on about?  It's not the economy, stupid. There the charmed existence - low inflation, even lower unemployment - continues. Any prime minister (and to be honest, any president) through the last 50 years would kill for a record like that. Nor, in truth, is it public services either. The cash flowing copiously into health and education may be taking time to work its way through, but waiting lists, like exam results, are improving pretty consistently now. You don't want tax cuts when you talk to the pollsters. You want an infrastructure that fits your life and a tolerable context for everyday living - and you're getting that.  The government you have is as competent at delivering tangible benefits as any in recent memory. Remember John Major and weep. The Europe you have is expanding with a sweep of confidence that puts ancient conflicts and hatreds to rest. Peace in our time at last, a future that works and no nuclear shadow. Even turnout, after all the British wittering, is up. So why be so goddamn glum?  And the plain truth is that there is no reason for flailing gloom. There is, indeed, every good reason for optimism. What was D-day remembered in those veterans' faces but a fight against tyranny, an affirmation of freedom? What was Reagan's burial service but an affirmation (however frail) that politicians can deliver the happiness of good memories?  Oh, come on you guys. The sun shines bright over our Europe. France can smile in Portuguese extra time. Toiling pundits should have better things to do today than try to make smooth sense of the inchoately intractable, to rationalise the merely flippant. Ronnie would have got on his horse and ridden away - but we have Wimbledon coming, and John McEnroe's ancestral cry resounds. "You cannot be serious..."  