A year or so ago, I got into discussion with a Labour minister who knows his history. At one point, we found ourselves talking about George Dangerfield's 1935 classic (still in print, I believe, and still being discussed in relation to modern politics) The Strange Death of Liberal England, the book that tries to make sense of how the apparent Liberal hegemony in early 20th-century British politics collapsed into complete marginality in the aftermath of the first world war. Were we beginning to witness the Strange Death of Labour England, I wondered. Even then, it felt as though Labour was sliding inexorably downwards from its own hegemonic years under Tony Blair. It was hard to see a sign, or indeed any reason, why the slide should not continue. Not so fast, responded my ministerial companion. Labour is certainly sliding disastrously, he admitted. No argument about the short-term seriousness of the decline. But you forget that Labour's vote is still based on class identity, not ideology. That wasn't, in the end, true of the Liberals once all men and women got the vote after 1918 and 1928. The Liberals were an ideological party. When they went into decline they went into decline everywhere – north, south, east and west – as their ideology fell apart in new conditions. Labour is simply different. Even in decline, Labour is still electorally concentrated in particular regions, where its class identity remains strong. As long as first-past-the-post continues, Labour is likely to remain strong at Westminster, and thus is in a position, if it takes the right decisions, to rebound. The classic proof of that came in the 1983 election, when Labour and the Liberal/SDP Alliance each polled about 8m votes, but Labour ended up with 209 MPs against the alliance's 23. Today, as the 2009 Labour party conference disperses, there is still truth in what the minister said. Those who are angrily anxious to write the obituary of the Labour party on the basis of its current slide in the polls – at 23% this week, Labour is now five points adrift of the 28% it polled in 1983, hitherto seen as the most ignominious result in its modern history – need to recognise that opinion poll decline does not necessarily translate into terminal irrelevance. First past the post has a lot to do with this, but in a different way in 2009-10 compared with 1983. Back in 1983, it was the solidity of the Labour heartlands that allowed the party to remain a big player. This time, the growth of third, fourth and fifth parties may have a similar effect, allowing Labour to win a surprisingly large number of seats on quite small shares of the poll in individual constituencies. In other words, Labour could benefit from a microcosmic effect rather similar to the macro effect from which it benefited in 2005, when 35.2% support gave Labour 356 seats and a healthy Commons majority of 66. A lot of Labour MPs may actually survive next year thanks to the strength of small parties – outright winners with shares in the low 30s and even the upper 20s may not be uncommon. Brighton gave one a kind of hallucinatory vision of how this process might feel. Inside the conference bubble, Labour has had a decent conference. Gordon Brown was quite good. His senior ministers were often more than OK. The party had good things to say. There were no plots and few embarrassments. The conference found, to its surprise, that the party actually felt quite good about itself. The conference has been, in short, restorative for a party that fears and even knows that electoral disaster is now just months away. It's all relative, of course, and blind loyalism is an unattractive quality at the best of times, but my point, which I don't think anyone who has been in Brighton can seriously dispute, is that this has been a good conference for Labour in all the circumstances. Outside the bubble, of course, it feels and is different. People aren't interested. They think Brown is useless. Politics is not an important part of their lives. Leave the conference centre and you don't meet lobbyists or protesters, you meet freshers' week students getting legless on pub-crawl drinking binges. It's another world entirely. But that's my point. When the election comes, most people will vote, not stay away. And in Labour areas, a lot of them will continue to vote Labour for all the old mix of reasons. I'm not at all saying Labour will win or do well in the general election. The result will probably be decisively awful. But I remain to be persuaded that Labour is as dead as some now believe. Whether this is a good thing or a bad thing, a sign of hope or of despair, is not the point. This isn't the strange death of Labour England (or Scotland or Wales). It's the strange living death of Labour England. And that's a different thing from the oblivion that was wreaked on the Liberals nearly a century ago.