Readers may be aware that the left has stormed to power in three memorable and widely separated electoral landslides since the Victorian era. They are, in reverse chronological order, the New Labour triumph of 1997 (repeated in 2001), the postwar Labour landslide of 1945, and the Liberal landslide of 1906. They were won, readers may also recall, under the respective leaderships of Tony Blair, Clement Attlee and, er, someone else. The name of this third electoral magician of the left? Step forward this country's forgotten radical prime minister, Sir Henry Campbell-Bannerman.It is a hundred years ago next month since CB, as everyone always called him, began the Liberal party's longest, greatest and, as it transpired, final era in government, an era that would last in one form or another until the fall of the Lloyd George coalition in October 1922, nearly 17 years later. Not bad, 17 years. It is a span of office as yet unmatched by any other British government of the left - twice the lifetime of New Labour's reign so far. And, while it is rightly associated most of all with the two names of Asquith and Lloyd George, its first and greatest victory - the January 1906 election that the Liberals called as soon as they took office - was won not by either of them but by Campbell-Bannerman.I like the sound of Campbell-Bannerman. He was, wrote Margot Asquith, "essentially a bon vivant, a boulevardier and a humorist" - and of how many prime ministers since Disraeli can those attractive words be said? According to his only late-20th-century biographer, John Wilson, CB was "an unusual person to emerge as the leader of a great political party, or to be a politician at all, for he was easy-going, had little ambition and inclined to let well alone". He kept politics and government in proportion. No one ever accused CB of being a workaholic. And unlike so many other politicians whose personalities have been warped by grievance and bitterness, he was never a grudge-bearer.But don't be misled by all this into dismissing him as nothing more than a lazy pragmatist. Campbell-Bannerman may not have been an intellectual, but he knew what he fought for and he loved what he knew. His politics were as deeply and thoroughly imprinted on him as his lifelong love of Balzac and Flaubert. CB's Liberalism was real, straightforward and unshakable. "What is Liberalism?" he asked in a speech of 1898, before coming up with an answer that, while not exactly Noam Chomsky, nevertheless still wears pretty well, both in principles and language, more than a century later:"I should say it means the acknowledgment in practical life of the truth that men are best governed who govern themselves; that the general sense of mankind, if left alone, will make for righteousness; that artificial privileges and restraints upon freedom, so far as they are not required in the interests of the community, are hurtful; and that the laws, while, of course, they cannot equalise conditions, can at least avoid aggravating inequalities, and ought to have for their object the securing to every man the best chance he can have of a good and useful life."I don't just warm to Campbell-Bannerman. I admire him. I admire him because, when this broad, inclusive progressivism was put to the test by a seriously divisive issue, he did not bend with the wind but made the right and principled call. Nowhere was this more true than over the Boer war, on which the Liberals - then in opposition - came close to rupture, with much of the party hierarchy under Lord Rosebery supporting the war while the radicals opposed it. As newly elected leader, CB tried to steer a middle course, but in the end it was he who in 1901 made the most important anti-war speech of the era, denouncing the Salisbury government for using "methods of barbarism" to pursue the campaign against the Boers.Admirable too was his highly pragmatic but radical way of governing. The most important example of this was his embrace of the emerging Labour party. CB liked Labour people, agreed with their principal grievances and, within months of taking office in 1906, delivered them the 1906 Trades Disputes Act. Fighting off efforts led by Asquith to water the legislation down, Campbell-Bannerman pushed a much stronger bill through the cabinet which became the cornerstone of 20th-century labour law.Admirable above all was his cool political touch. CB led his party from the centre, not the extremes, rebuilding it to sweep from the bad defeat of 1900 to the massive win of 1906. He took his party from a Tory majority of 134 to a Liberal one of 130, one of the largest general election swings of all time. He did it by concentrating on his opponents' weaknesses - the divisive protectionist tariff campaign - while not exaggerating what the Liberals could achieve. Most of his colleagues thought he was wrong; the result proved him triumphantly right.In office, the Campbell-Bannerman government outperformed expectations - and how many radical governments can make that claim? Had it not been for the Tory majority in the House of Lords, CB would have accomplished education reform and abolition of the multiple franchise - as well as trade union law reform - by the end of his first year in office. As it was, his ministers - Haldane on the army, Lloyd George on merchant shipping - showed themselves real reformers.All political careers end in failure, wrote Enoch Powell in a famous remark in an essay about Joseph Chamberlain. David Blunkett must be reflecting on the truth of that this weekend. But Powell's remark was not true of CB, except in the sense that Campbell-Bannerman's political career ended with his death in Downing Street in early 1908, a few days after he had resigned the premiership on his deathbed in favour of Asquith. If that isn't going out at the top, what is?Yet the gods have had an even crueller fate than failure in store for Campbell-Bannerman: oblivion. Andrew Bonar Law once vied with CB for prime ministerial obscurity, until the late Robert Blake rescued him from neglect with a biography entitled The Unknown Prime Minister. Perhaps, in a few decades' time, Alec Douglas-Home will have receded far enough into the historical shadows to be even more forgotten by future generations. Until then, sadly and most unjustly, the palm of being our unknown prime minister remains with the admirable and unjustly neglected Henry Campbell-Bannerman.