It says something about the fashions of intellectual life that there are more books in print these days about the historian AJP Taylor than by him. But if ever it was in the collective public interest for a book to be urgently reprinted, because it can speak so directly to our present discontents, then that book is Taylor's The Troublemakers. Subtitled Dissent over British Foreign Policy 1792-1939, the book was Taylor's own favourite from his output. Based on his Ford lectures at Oxford University in 1956, the unerring coherence of The Troublemakers is never in doubt and was never more relevant than today, nearly half a century later. The Troublemakers leaves an infinitely sharper and brighter imprint in the mind than most of the thousands of history books that have been written in the subsequent half-century, about which it can truly be said that they say more and more about less and less. No one could possibly say that about Taylor's book.  The Troublemakers is, in one sense, an apologia on behalf of Taylor's own lifetime of radical iconoclasm about international affairs. It was an iconoclasm which he practised as well as preached, as a leading early member of the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament, an opponent of Suez and frequently as a defender of the Soviet rather than the American stance in successive cold war confrontations. Taylor was regularly mocked by the foreign policy establishment, for example, for repeatedly argu ing that the Soviet Union had no intention of invading western Europe. But in the end he was probably more right than his critics.  The Troublemakers also tells a national story - and it is a story that has not ended yet. For every national tradition, Taylor argued, there is a national countertradition, and the dissenting tradition in foreign policy is one of the most sustained countertraditions of them all.  Taylor mined a rich mother lode of anti-war, anti-imperial, anti-Whitehall dissent in British public life through some of the most bellicose eras of modern history, from the French revolution to the outbreak of the second world war. His heroes are sometimes famous men, like Gladstone, more often half-forgotten men, like John Bright and occasionally wholly forgotten ones like David Urquhart or HN Brailsford. Throughout, though, there is an essential message: that there is a radically different way of defining the British national interest from the one embraced by governments down the ages - and that it is one which can embrace both the traditional right and the traditional left.  Most of the time, the challenges mounted by the troublemakers have tended to be quixotic, marginal and unsuccessful. But not invariably. At certain moments, the troublemakers understand more clearly than anyone else what needs to be said and done. The climax of Taylor's book marks such a moment. It comes on the evening of September 2 1939, when   Neville Chamberlain sat down, in a shocked chamber and without a single cheer, after giving the Commons his latest - and, as it turned out, his last - report on his efforts to strike a deal with Hitler over the invasion of Poland.  As Chamberlain took his seat, the acting leader of the Labour party, Arthur Greenwood, rose to reply. As he did so, there were mutterings of encouragement to Greenwood from both sides, and a shout, traditionally attributed to Leo Amery, came from the restive Conservative benches. Taylor treated that shout as the apotheosis of the "troublemaking" tradition -the moment when the outsiders reclaimed the moral initiative from the insiders and saved the nation from its leaders. Today, Amery's words have a power which vaults across the decades to another generation as it stands on the eve of another war: "Speak for England, Arthur!"  History never exactly repeats itself, and the supporters of peace and war in this generation are interestingly transposed today compared with their predecessors in 1939. But we are once again a country desperately in need of a clear, temperate voice at a time of unmistakable international crisis. Rarely has it seemed more important in recent years for the national interest on the world stage to be properly articulated and clearly acted upon. And yet if Tony Blair no longer speaks for England - or, more properly, Britain - then who does?  Even now, it may seem unfair to write Blair so peremptorily out of the script. He still speaks for many more people - and in more subtle ways - than those who rush to label this as "the Bush-Blair war" ever acknowledge. He has, in his way, been pursuing a necessary, often lonely, frequently unrewarding and at times even heroic effort to prevent a dangerous American war against a dangerous Iraq. He is - or was - right to try to contain the administration that rules the US, just as he is also right to seek to contain the threat from Saddam Hussein.   Nor is Blair's frequently stated desire for Britain to have the best of both worlds - European influence and transatlantic influence - either unprincipled or tactically wrong. That policy made enormous sense before September 11, when Blair invoked it to try to head off the Bush administration's early signs of multilateral disengagement. But it has been tested to destruction since September 11. It can no longer bear the weight that the combination of the danger from terrorism and the momentum of the Bush administration's response now place on it. Bush has forced Blair to choose between Europe and the US, and Blair cannot avoid the tragic choice.  That is why this weekend's Blair visit to Bush at Camp David could be pivotal in our modern nationhood. Driven by a combination of anger, oil, domestic electoral calculation, and the awesome re-energisation of what Dwight Eisenhower called the military-industrial complex, the Americans have got themselves over-exposed on Iraq. By overcommitting militarily so hastily, Bush is now a step away from having to go to war largely to save his own face. War with Iraq is not even in Americas interests, never mind Britain's.  In theory this could be seen as a great opportunity for Blair. In theory, this weekend is the moment when Blair can say to Bush that our national interest is at odds with America's war. In theory, that refusal could matter. In theory, it is even the moment when Blair could start to make the great overdue turn towards Europe to which Bush has finally forced him.  In practice, none of these things is going to happen. Tragically, when Blair says he positively wants America to act this way, he seems to be saying what he believes. Tragically, he cannot contemplate saying no to the US, even when Bush has pushed him to it. That is why we are again at a "speak for England" moment. Yet even AJP Taylor would have been hard put to explain how the man who currently speaks for England is, of all unlikely people, Jacques Chirac.  <B>