The gloating faction of Labour MPs were hard at work yesterday trying to inject some triumphalism into an otherwise somnolent house. David Winnick, for instance, renewed his attack on Harold Pinter. This practice of MPs attacking playwrights instead of each other is new. Perhaps they will start putting their views up outside theatres.  "Disgraceful treason!" - Gerald Kaufman. "Should be hanged with the intestines of a Serb infantryman" - David Winnick.   Mr Winnick asked: "Will we be informed if that discredited gang of appeasers outside - people like the Pilgers and the Pinters - have written and apologised, having got it completely wrong?"  It was interesting that the gang's political wing - Benn, Corbyn, Mahon, etc - were absent from the chamber, no doubt canvassing.  But Tam Dalyell was there. Tam has staying power. If Tam had solemnly announced on Monday that next day the sun would rise in the west, he would be there on Tuesday afternoon announcing that the sun's arrival in the east posed a series of almost insuperable problems. But at least he would be there.  He told Mr Winnick: "I have to say, frankly, that I have shared platforms with John Pilger and Harold Pinter, and the apology for which you ask may be forth coming, but it will be in five years' time, when the position might be altogether clearer."  Oh yeah? I'll check back in five years. I suspect they'll apologise around the time Tam stops talking about the Belgrano, or when the rings of Saturn melt, whichever comes first.  Meanwhile, the sound of the government refusing to crow has become almost deafening. Tony Blair addressed the nation from Downing Street and told us: "I feel no sense of triumph now. We began this air campaign with reluctance but resolve. We end it with no sense of rejoicing."  Back in the Commons there was a startling sight: a Labour defence secretary announcing the successful end of a war. I do not know if this has ever happened before.  But the new watchwords "Don't rejoice! Don't rejoice!"   are on the bleepers, and George Robertson was firmly on message yesterday. He did allow himself a jab at "those who said there was nothing we could do, let the blood flow, it will stabilise - they have been proved wrong, and I hope one day they will apologise". But the tone was downbeat and even weary.  John Maples, the Tory spokesman, is lucid, coherent and speaks well without notes. Yet somehow he could not find a word of praise for Mr Robertson. His carping was a smooth parliamentary performance, but wretchedly wrong for the day.  Mr Robertson has had a good war, and so has Robin Cook. Mr Cook will never be a greatly loved politician, in the way that a few such as Mo Mowlam and Denis Healey lodge in the public affection, but I suspect that from now on he will be respected.