The war seems to be going nowhere, slowly, so Tory MPs have launched a massive rhetorical escalation. The shock-waves could be felt miles away as Sir Peter Tapsell announced that "this Balkan air war is the most incompetent operation Britain has been involved in since the Crimean war''.

Civilians fled for cover as Alan Clark raged that the United States Air Force had "an abominable record, hitting Iranian airliners, British forces, bridges, trains, factories and now refugee convoys . . . it is the worst possible implement to use''.

But Mr Clark positively cosied up to the USAF compared to the Downing Street press secretary, Alastair Campbell, "who has gone to Brussels to put a spin on things. But you cannot spin a war. He would be better advised to stay coaching the prime minister," (Mr Clark curled his lip, and when he curls his lip it stays curled, as if he'd inserted Eva Braun heated rollers there) "whose sole present practice is to wave his hands about and say 'Milosevic' all the time."

Yet in spite of all this rage, yesterday's debate on Kosovo was grim, unhysterical, and deeply anxious. Often there was an eerie quiet in the chamber , as if no one else was present except the member speaking.

There were no cheers, except for the ritual praise for our armed forces; equally, there was no jeering or scorn. You could sense a certain unease when the isolationists and the pacifists spoke, but this reflected less disagreement with what they said than a mild rancour that anyone could claim with such certainty that they knew what was for the best.

The mood was the opposite of tub-thumping: it was tub-tapping; rabble-soothing, sabre-sheathing, calming and not hortatory.

The foreign secretary began. He was as optimistic as the circumstances currently permit. The campaign had made a "real impact on President Milosevic's war machine''. (Unlike John Prescott, Mr Cook knows exactly how to pronounce it. He just swallows it whole, like a bad oyster, so it emerges as "Mlos"'.)

Serbian commanders were having trouble keeping in touch with HQ because of the bombing. Loss of oil reserves meant that `officers have to watch the fuel gauge with increasing worry'', he said, making them sound like Allegro drivers who had forgotten to fill up on Christmas Eve.

Milosevic's tanks are now in hiding from our planes. Serb reservists are refusing the call-up. Around the world, other nations applaud us.

All of this should have been a cause for rejoicing, yet nobody at all rejoiced. Mr Cook stood grasping the dispatch box, one leg and a beard jutting fiercely forward, being heard in something near to silence. This must be the least jingoistic war Britain has ever been engaged in.

MPs are by now way ahead of the government in recognising that a ground war will be essential if Nato is to succeed. Nicholas Soames, Martin Bell  all those who spoke with authority assumed the use of land troops, and the need to prepare public opinion for the inevitable losses.

The most unusual suggestion came from Gwynneth Dunwoody who revealed that as a little girl, she had been taken for tea with Marshal Tito. The thought of Ms Dunwoody as a little girl was bewildering enough. "Tito told us that when the Germans arrived, the Serbs were largely unarmed, so they put dinner plates on the road. When the very precise Germans got out to look, they were shot, and the Serbs had a tank."

I'll bet Nato hasn't thought of the dinner plate option. That's why the Greeks are thought of as the weak link in the alliance  they'd want to smash them before they could be used.