Alan Clark rose in the Commons on 19 April and surveyed the 'shambolic performance' of the Third Way at war with the hauteur only that tiny band of patricians who are also military historians can get away with in a democratic age.  The Prime Minister was 'making up policy as he went along'. The United States Air Force has been justly feared by its allies and civilians for decades for its alarming capacity to drop bombs on everyone but the enemy. And as for Tony Blair's decision to strengthen Nato's PR by giving Brussels the services of Alastair Campbell, the unelected Minister for Propaganda and member of the War Cabinet, words deserted him until he spat: 'You do not spin your way out of bloodshed.'  Ah, but you do – and into it.  Since 1945, shooting the messenger has been a metaphor rather than a policy option for Western European governments. Until last week, the news-chat hosts on Radio 5 were silencing Serb officials with shouts of 'Shut yer face, Branco, we allow you on our airwaves but when do you play fair by letting British spokespersons tell your people about the Kosovo massacres, eh?' I doubt we will hear that line of argument again.  A chronology of the events leading to the deaths of TV make-up women, whose flattering arts our leaders normally patronise with gratitude, illustrates a paradox of modern spin it can be both deadly and ineffectual simultaneously.  Given the effect of the pictures of refugees on public opinion, you might not have suspected we needed news manipulation. On 8 April, Air Commodore David Wilby implied Nato was happy with war reports in the West and warned Serb broadcasters they would be attacked unless they showed them for six hours a day. 'Serb journalists,' he said, 'were instruments of propaganda and repression which filled the airwaves with lies.'  His threat was greeted with hollow laughter. Was Nato's grand alliance so stung by criticism of its failure to help the Kosovars it was reduced to blowing up Belgrade-FM? If spreading propaganda was going to be a capital offence, would widows gather outside Wapping and would the Downing Street press office be reduced to rubble?  A shamed Nato withdrew its ultimatum the next day. Then Whitehall became agitated by John Simpson's readiness to do his job as the USAF bombed the refugees it was meant to save. Western leaders agreed they were experiencing what PR professionals call 'perception management problems'. A harder stance was required. Blair was 'taking charge' of 'the public-relations war against Slobodan,' said the papers. Campbell was ordered to 'co-ordinate the message' for Nato, and, ominously, provide a shrink-wrapped 'story' at the end of each day rather than a straightforward recital of facts.  'You are going to see some changes around here over the next couple of days,' said a Nato spokesman after Campbell had left.  The war of words became real and 10 Serb journalists and their helpers died so that Nato could claim the great victory of knocking their station off air for a couple of hours in the middle of the night.  Milosevic and, incidentally, the equally fascist Croatian regime, whose crimes appear to have been forgotten, use broadcasters to incite murderous violence. Their propaganda is analysed well in a new study of the media and modern conflict as is the broadcasting career of the African Goebbels, Ferdinand Nahimana, a Rwandan historian, who got tired of studying bloodshed and decided to spill the blood of his contemporaries. His Radio-Télévision Libre des Milles Collines was one of the great engines behind the genocide (to use the word correctly for once) of the Tutsis. If, instead of doing nothing, the aid agencies had called on the somnolent UN to send bombers to destroy it, few would have shed a tear.  But RTLM was allowed to broadcast and all Nato media strategists have delivered is a blip in the coverage of Serb TV and sympathy for the enemy. Meanwhile, the academics' wider conclusions are unlikely to be welcomed by Western journalists and politicians.  Many secular Muslims in Kosovo are no more Muslim than many Jews were Jewish in Nazi Germany. Ethnic identity is imposed by gunmen and it's no good protesting that you have never read the Koran and drink brandy every night if they decide you are a fundamentalist out to destroy Orthodox Serbia. You are what your assassins say you are.  But in the Yugoslav conflicts of the Nineties, only the best reporters, working for editors who give them time and space, have avoided the clichés of deep-seated ethnic hatreds bubbling up like foul air from an ancient swamp. This simplification allowed politicians like Douglas Hurd -– who was to go on to represent the NatWest Bank in deals with Milosevic – to shrug their shoulders and ask what he was meant to do about such uncorrectable barbarism. The very phrase 'ethnic cleansing' was an insult the Belgrade and Zagreb leaderships accepted with gratitude and added to their dictionaries. Once you get into the ethnic game, you destabilise multiracial states.  By the time Martin Bell left Bosnia in 1995, he had all but had it with the simplicities of journalism. 'More means worse,' he said. 'The multiplicity of deadlines', the constant pressure to produce ever-snappier reports for rolling news channels meant that hacks never had the time to find out what was going on, let alone explain complexity to the audience. At one point, Bell told the BBC that Serbs were being driven from their homes. It didn't fit the script of goodies and baddies and London told him the story was 'too emotionally confusing to be good for the public'.  Modern spin doctors hate complexity as much as the media they feed. They represent rich, stable countries fighting a poor, gangster state. Like wealthy men everywhere, rich nations do not like risks, which is why they prefer to lob missiles into the Balkans rather than endanger the lives of their foot soldiers and the reputations of their generals and politicians by fighting wars on the ground. They don't want the poor, which is why Jack Straw is bullying the Asylum Bill through Parliament. And they are affronted by the lesè-majesté of critics, which is why Campbell is at the heart of policy.  Past wars have had propagandists urging young men to sacrifice themselves. The PR men for the Third Way have spent their careers spinning the line that you can have politics without sacrifice: better public services and lower taxes; 'social inclusion' without redistribution of wealth. Will they and their masters know how to sell a hard, complicated ground war to soothed electorates? Or want to?  I hesitate before joining the military Mystic Megs in the armchairs of Fleet Street, but the best guess at the moment is that we will carry on spinning and dropping bombs and the Kosovars and the Serbs will carry on shedding blood until either the rump of Yugoslavia is a wasteland or the Russians come to the aid of Yugoslavia's leaders (and ours) and cut a nasty, messy deal.  • The Media of Conflict, Tim Allen &amp; Jean Seaton (ed) Zed Books