Tony Blair spoke yesterday for the first time of his enthusiasm over the choice of Dr Rowan Williams as the new Archbishop of Canterbury. On the day that the radical new head of the Anglican church warned in his Dimbleby lecture that politics was in danger of being reduced to "instantaneous button-pressing responses to surface needs", the prime minister praised Dr Williams for his "insights" and said he welcomed the role of church leaders in political debate.  Although Mr Blair formally recommended Dr Williams as the new head of the Church of England ear lier this year, he was widely assumed to be wary about the elevation of a bishop with radical views on war and inequality. But Mr Blair has now made clear that from the start of the nomination process, Dr Williams was always his preferred candidate to succeed Archbishop George Carey  "People always said to me at the time, 'But isn't it going to be difficult if he criticises on Iraq?'" Mr Blair said in his end-of-year Guardian interview. "But, contrary to what people say, I think it is fine. I think the church should always speak out where it feels strongly about things. I have always thought that."  Mr Blair took direct issue with Dr Williams's view in last night's lecture that consumerism was driving morality out of politics. The reason he was in favour of public service reform was "value driven", Mr Blair said. "These services are actually the route to social justice," he said. "So I am not sure I agree with that part of it."  Where he did agree with Dr Williams was that there were many things in the modern world that governments could not accomplish on their own.  "I think that what he is saying is two things: first of all, that people have to come together on a broader basis than simply the nation state in order to tackle these problems; and secondly, what he is saying is that all these great move ments should be managed according to certain key values - and that is where I suppose religion plays its part, because it can give values to that," Mr Blair told the Guardian.  In last night's lecture, Dr Williams warned that governments are less able now than they were in the past to give a moral lead which ordinary citizens can follow. The archbishop warned that government deregulation meant "the withdrawal of the state from many of those areas where it used to bring some kind of moral pressure to bear".