President Bill Clinton dispensed shamrock and traditional stern words to Northern Ireland's political leaders in Washington yesterday when he told visiting party chiefs to make further compromises to secure the full implementation of the stalled Good Friday peace agreement.  He was scheduled to hold separate St Patrick's Day meetings with the Stormont First Minister, David Trimble, and the Sinn Fein leader, Gerry Adams, last night in an attempt to break the deadlock over arms decommissioning.  He was also due to meet the Northern Ireland Secretary, Mo Mowlam, in a fresh round of White House Irish initiatives.  Sources said that Mr Clinton would not get involved in detailed negotiations with the visiting politicians.   But he would again make clear Washington's view that the arms issue could not be allowed to threaten implementation of the agreement or the setting up of the new executive.  The White House warnings came as the Belfast murder of the loyalist activist, Frankie Curry, cast a shadow over the annual Irish political exodus across the Atlantic to mark St Patrick's Day.  It was a warm and sunny spring day in Washington. So many Irish guests were due to attend the White House gala dinner last night that the event had to be moved from inside the president's official residence to a marquee on the South Lawn.  Like other cities in the United States, Washington was awash with green garlands and balloons as America indulged once again in its ever-spiralling March 17 feel-good extravaganza.  But the political frostiness between the visiting delegations remained strongly in evidence as key Northern Ireland leaders traded insults in the hours before their meetings with Mr Clinton.  Mr Adams repeated his claim that the republican movement could not deliver on the decommissioning issue and said he did not expect to be lectured on the issue by Mr Clinton.  'The president knows as well as Mr Trimble that IRA decommissioning is not a precondition for Sinn Fein to hold ministerial office,' the Sinn Fein leader said.  Mr Adams accused Mr Trimble of creating a crisis out of the issue. 'He knows that. You know that. Everybody knows that.' Mr Adams said yesterday.  But Mr Trimble hit back, accusing the Sinn Fein leader of shirking his responsibilities.  'I don't know when it's going to dawn on them, but anybody who has any influence on them needs to exercise that.  'It's a matter of when does it dawn on this small handful of militarists that peace does mean an end to what they've been doing for the last 30 years,' Mr Trimble added.  Sources close to Mr Trimble said yesterday that the Ulster Unionist leader fears Sinn Fein is hoping to stall on decommissioning until the publication of Chris Patten's report on the future policing of Northern Ireland, which is not due before September.  The sources said that Mr Trimble would not be able to hold the line in his party on the agreement for that length of time.   The Ulster Unionist Party holds its annual conference this weekend, where opponents of Mr Trimble are expected to mount a strong attack on his handling of the decommissioning crisis and to try to win key party positions from Mr Trimble's supporters.   For all the rhetoric, Mr Trimble and Mr Adams were due to hold a private meeting together in Washington in an attempt to resolve the political impasse.  However no one in any camp was signalling that the difficult issues will be resolved during the days in America.  All sides said the real work will begin when the leaders are back in Northern Ireland.