Tony Blair sent two of his most senior officials on an unannounced official visit to the United States last week in an effort to place his Labour government at the centre of US-European relations under President George Bush's new Republican administration. Mr Blair is determined to prove to domestic and international opinion that he can be as close to the Republican President Bush as he was to the former Democratic president Bill Clinton.  As a result, even while Mr Clinton remained in office, Downing Street quietly breached protocol last week by holding two days of top-level meetings with the Bush team in an effort to ensure that the new relationship remains as special as the old one.  Normally, such negotiations would not take place until the new administration has taken office, but Mr Blair is so determined to stake his claim with Mr Bush that he sent his chief of staff, Jonathan Powell, and his foreign affairs adviser, John Sawers, to Washington last week to jump the queue.  The prime minister is pitching hard to be the first European leader to travel to Washington for talks with the new US leader. Officials are hoping that he will make his next Washington visit in February or March, weeks before Mr Blair is expected to call a general election, widely predicted to be pencilled in for May 3.  If Mr Bush agrees to the visit, which British officials hope will be confirmed as soon as this week, he will hand Mr Blair a double prize. Mr Blair would not only be the first European leader to win an invitation to the Bush White House, but he would also frustrate the opposition leader William Hague's claims to be the man with the new president's ear.  During his visit on January 15 and 16 Mr Powell had talks with Andrew Card, the new White House chief of staff, and other Bush officials, while Mr Sawers met General Colin Powell, the new US secretary of state, and had a two-hour discussion with Mr Bush's national security adviser, Condoleezza Rice. The British officials did not meet Mr Bush, who was in Texas.  British officials said yesterday that while the visit was not a secret, they had not drawn attention to it. Britain did not want to offend other European governments, a source said.  The ostensible main purpose of the Blair visit would be to ensure that the two leaders, who have never met, would be able to get to know one another and to build a relationship similar to that between Mr Blair and Mr Clinton. British diplomatic officials said yesterday that the two leaders are politically compatible centrists who will find it easy to achieve a personal rapport.  Politically, the main issues on the agenda include defence, notably US missile defence plans and the European defence initiative, as well as Bosnia, Kosovo and Iraq and trade issues.  Mr Blair spoke to Mr Clinton about Northern Ireland as recently as last week. So far, however, the contacts between Mr Blair and Mr Bush are confined to a 10-minute telephone conversation in December after Al Gore finally conceded defeat in the presidential election. Officials said yesterday that a Blair-Bush phone conversation about the Middle East and the Lockerbie trial was possible in the next two weeks.  "I don't think there is any doubt that the prime minister is determined to continue to be the European leader and ally with the highest standing in Washington under the new administration," a Downing Street source said yesterday.  The foreign secretary, Robin Cook, will be the first senior British minister to visit Washington since the change of administration when he meets General Powell at the state department next month.  In Washington yesterday Mr Card confirmed that Mr Bush's first foreign trip as president is likely to be to Mexico. He will also travel to Quebec for a summit of north and south American leaders in April.  Mr Bush's first scheduled visit to Europe is in June when he attends the EU-US summit in Gothenberg. But senior state department sources said last week that Mr Bush was considering an earlier trip across the Atlantic, possibly to Nato headquarters in Brussels.