British defence chiefs said yesterday they were not aware of any leaks to China of top secret American intelligence that would enable Beijing to detect and attack Britain's nuclear submarine strike force. The denial came as Britain's nuclear secrets became caught up in the spreading web of speculation about the damage that has been done to the US nuclear programme by leaks from the Los Alamos laboratories in New Mexico and other US nuclear research sites. Details of Britain's Trident submarine missile system and of satellite tracking of the nuclear subs are believed to have been leaked to China in 1997, according to a report this week in the New York Times. The details were said to have been divulged during a visit to Beijing in May 1997 by Peter Lee, a Chinese-born American nuclear scientist working for the Pentagon at the Lawrence Livermore weapons laboratory in California. Mr Lee is alleged to have supplied China with secrets about a highly classified advanced British-US radar system that was being developed to track submarines. American prosecutors decided against charging Mr Lee with spying in order to prevent details of the radar system being disclosed in court. The secrets passed by Mr Lee could lead to China being able to detect British and US nuclear submarines, Republican senator Jon Kyl of the US senate intelligence committee told the BBC yesterday. 'Whether or not the technology is used against us, it was a significant breach of security that the information was revealed,' Mr Kyl said. In London, junior defence minister John Spellar said yesterday that the ministry of defence was 'not aware of any unauthorised release of nuclear warhead information of UK origin or of any information which could help others detect our Trident nuclear submarines'. The Peter Lee revelations come less than three months after detailed allegations that another Chinese-born American nuclear scientist, Wen Ho Lee, breached Los Alamos security by downloading hundreds of classified files detailing virtually the entire history of the US nuclear weapons research programme. Details of British nuclear tests were contained in the downloaded files, US officials believe. The two Mr Lees are not believed to be related. In response to mounting criticisms, the US department of energy unveiled sweeping new security measures at its nuclear research laboratories earlier this week, including tightening access and placing strict new curbs on computer use at the sites. 