Chance Witness<br />by Matthew Parris<br />528pp, Viking, £18.99 I've known Matthew Parris pretty well for nearly 10 years, and he has always been kind and helpful and thoughtful, with only the occasional whiff of cattiness carried faintly on the breeze. He is also very kind about me in this alarmingly good book, so you might want to discount what follows. The cover shows Matthew with his hand over his mouth, as if he had just let slip a dangerous indiscretion. Yet I've read few autobiographies that are so carefully considered, so empty of anything glib or cheap. The only damaging material is about people who are already dead, or who are big enough to take it. (Among the many wonderful vignettes of Margaret Thatcher is one illustrating her reliance on the Sun, and in particular the two-bullet-point editorials that used to appear opposite page three. "One day she plonked the paper down in front of the assembled male company, open at this spread, and said 'what do you think of those two, eh?' No man present dared catch another's eye.") The book also made me laugh out loud several times. Parris is savage about the late and little lamented Dr Sir Alan Glyn, a Tory bore whom even the bores avoided. The descriptions of him eating langoustines, shell and all ("I remember especially the feelers poking through his moustache and waving wildly as his yellowed teeth chomped the heads"), and of the time the wardrobe fell over door side down with Dr Glyn inside are alone almost worth the price of the book. If the unexamined life is not worth living, then Matthew's life has paid for itself several times. He learns from almost everything - his boyhood in Africa, his homosexuality, his work with Mrs Thatcher, his time as an MP, his disastrous stint on Weekend World, subsequent huge success as a journalist, and the inexplicable decision to spend four winter months on an almost uninhabited island near the Antarctic circle. There is the occasional infelicity, such as his description of the one time he had sex with a woman ("it could have been a goat as far as I was concerned") but far more perfectly expressed truths that illuminate and inform. My favourite is this: "Being an MP feeds your vanity and starves your self-respect." This is a book full of wisdom and if we are invited along the way to share Matthew's many triumphs, why not? Is he expected to leave them out? I had vaguely thought of writing my own autobiography at some stage, though my plan was to exclude myself almost entirely, since readers might be entertained by some of the events and people I have encountered, even if they had no interest in me. Having read this book I realise what a silly idea that is. Matthew has done much more than me, and thought about it all much more deeply. I was reminded of the Peanuts cartoon in which Linus and Charlie Brown are lying down looking at clouds. Charlie Brown asks Linus what he can see, and he replies (something like), "I see a map of Prince Edward Island and a profile of the composer Aaron Copland. What do you see, Charlie Brown?" "I was going to say a horsey and a cat, but I don't think I'll bother now." Nor me.