We buzzed at the door of the magnificent  htel particulier  in Gaillac, just facing the abbey, and few yards from the River Tarn. Madame Pinon, the patronne, came down to welcome us and guided us up the massive winding staircase, along stone-flagged corridors, past trompe d'oeil marble alcoves, by tantalising glimpses of large cool sitting rooms, the kind where Madame Bovary wished she had spent her days, up to our own rooms, which were filled with antique furniture and big, comfortable beds. Our room had a view of the river; the children's overlooked the square.  We'd just flown in to Toulouse from London after an early start at home, so I left the family to nap while I explored the town, much of which consists of similarly superb  htels particuliers. These were huge private houses in which several generations of one wealthy family might have lived on the separate floors: grandparents, two brothers and a nephew, say, all with their own wives and children.   I popped into the wine museum (Gaillac wines are good, and better value than the more famous names in the rest of France, if not perhaps quite as wonderful as the publicity suggests: "Gaillac, enchanter of palates since the year 1000," they say.) Among the very best we found was made by a Scotsman, Alan Geddes, whose dessert wine is not only much better than a cheap Sauternes, but at Fr55 for a 50cl bottle, cheaper than a cheap Sauternes as well.) There is a tasting booth in the main  place , where willing helpers offered samples of any wine you choose.   Mme Pinon had recommended two restaurants and I made reservations at the Relais de la Portanelle, which was five minutes' walk from the B&amp;B, and looked slightly more child-friendly than the competition. Indeed our first-rate dinner, including drinks,    service and two  menus enfants, was excellent and came to 490 francs, around £50 all in.   Breakfast next day was on a terrace overlooking the abbey and the Place St Michel - fresh bread, hot flaky croissants, yoghurt, fruit, and plenty of excellent coffee (why are some French hotels so mean with coffee, quite as miserly as they would be with 60-year-old armagnac?) The whole visit was a delight, and since Madame charges a mere £25 for two people, including breakfast, a very affordable delight.   Next day, we took the motorway south for a short distance back towards Toulouse, then headed off onto D roads and finally bumpy lanes without any numbers at all, until we reached  la France profonde, that mysterious, sun-baked, sleepy place which exists    everywhere and yet remains frustratingly elusive. Just when you imagine you've found  la France profonde, you hear the noise from a cement plant, or sniff a municipal tip, or spot the preliminary levelling for a new autoroute.   But Madame Fieux's place in the tiny hamlet of Montpitol is as close as you're likely to get. A lake in the distance; a stand of oak trees; cool, shaded walks, the silence shattered only by the occasional bee - it would be hard to find a more peaceful place. She showed us outside and we exclaimed at the superb panoramic view and the pretty garden. "Not a garden," she said firmly,  "un parc."   "Comme Versailles," I said merrily, a compliment which she took as no more than the garden's due.   Moments later, we were lying on loungers, gazing out at what we could see of the view through the heat haze, and Mme Fieux arrived with a tray loaded with ice-cold beer, tonic, orange juice and Coke. Again, dinner was a short distance away - a 10-minute drive - and again the full meal for four, including one of the best Gaillac wines on the list, was just a fraction over £50. Breakfast was, if anything, even finer than the day before, and taken on the terrace in front of the house. Mme Fieux could not have been friendly. She charges a little more: 400 francs for a double room and breakfast.   We had found both places in Alastair Sawday's Special Places to Stay in France, one of a series which includes volumes covering Britain, plus Spain &amp; Portugal. These guides are quite open about charging for inclusion on the grounds that the books would be prohibitively expensive if they didn't. On the other hand, Sawday says, nowhere gets in if it isn't up to his standards, though presumably the most idyllic place in the world would be excluded if the owners didn't cough up.   I have to say that we have never had a failure. Looking through the guide is like reading the leaflet which   comes with a particularly nice box of chocolates - you want to experience the lot. In France, there are converted castles, ancient farmhouses, mills, cottages, a bishop's house, townhouses, forges, bastides, hunting lodges. Some are luxurious, stuffed with antique furniture, surrounded by fine formal gardens. Others are much simpler, and the prices can be as low as £18 for two people.   We stayed at three Sawdays in Britain, though it's a measure of the turnover in the B&amp;B trade that two of them have now stopped taking in visitors. A lot of people offer B&amp;B because they imagine it's a simple means of making extra money out of rooms they don't use, and an agreeable way to meet interesting folk. Which it is, up to a point, though after a while the sheer labour of making half a dozen cooked breakfasts in the morning while the children need to be taken to school, followed by heavy-duty skivvying in the bedrooms, plus a daily linen wash (or the cost of a professional laundry) and the many   extra expenses, put a considerable dent in that money supply. People who find that a year's hard work has netted them only around £3,000 may wonder whether it's worth going on.   Those who've done it tend to say that yes, most of the guests are agreeable, and some are a joy to welcome back, but it only takes one miserable couple who wake up the house coming home at 3am, or treat you like a particularly stupid chambermaid, or leave their room looking like a pigsty, to make you feel that your home has been unpleasantly invaded.   One of our best experiences was two years ago, in Wiltshire. Our room had a balcony overlooking the owners' great pride: a lovely flower and herb garden, with a lawn stretching down to a stream and a mill race. It was early summer, and we spent the day stretched out on the lawn, wrapped in the warm scent from the vegetation, listening to the water trickle by. Friends came to join us later and we sipped gin-and-tonics on the balcony while   watching the sun go down. Dinner was at a perfectly decent pub a half mile walk away and, no, I won't tell you where this Elysium is because they don't do B&amp;B any more. Luckily there are plenty of other, similarly nice, places which do.   This summer, I went to Adlestrop in Oxfordshire to write about the 85th anniversary of Edward Thomas's famous poem. (Incidentally, Anne Harvey's gorgeous book, Adlestrop Revisited, packed with essays, pictures,   research about the poem - and poems that pay tribute to the poem - is just published by Sutton Publishing at £12.99.) We had arranged to stay with John and Camilla Playfair at their Sawday-listed house in Aston Magna, just north of Morton-in-Marsh. John welcomed us as if we were his oldest friends down for the weekend.   We were shown to our suite, overlooking the swimming pool and the tennis courts, and my son and I settled down to watch the Cup Final. Meanwhile my wife and daughter took tea in the lounge and were given the guided tour, including the Japanese water garden the Playfairs made themselves.   Again friends joined us, and large gins were pressed on everyone. The Playfairs' daughter, an ex-student of Pru Leith, had cooked supper: a mountain of local asparagus, bought that morning and topped with balsamic vinegar and parmesan; chicken in honey with more local vegetables, then homemade praline and hazelnut icecream with a vast   bowl of strawberries. And a superb cheese board. We had brought our own wine, but the Playfairs, who'd spent the evening at a charity ball, returned in time to press port, brandy and stickies on us.   Next day, we couldn't face a full cooked breakfast, though it was willingly offered, and somehow made do with cereal, breads, toast, fresh fruit, and yoghurt. Before we left another cafetiere of coffee arrived and we were sent on our way to an excellent lunch at the Fox in Lower Oddington, a famous local pub where you need to arrive early, even on weekdays, because they don't take bookings.   The Playfairs charge £35 for a double room, which is slightly more than most B&amp;B's, but around half what you'd pay for a hotel room less than half as pleasant. For dinner they charged £48 for the six of us, but asked us to make the cheque out to the charity. It was quite the nicest, as well as the grandest B&amp;B we've ever stayed in.  The practicals<br />   Alastair Sawday's Special Places to Stay series comprises: British Bed &amp; Breakfast, 4th edition (£12.95); British Hotels &amp; Inns (£10.95); French Bed &amp; Breakfast, 5th edition (£13.95); Paris Hotels (£8.95); Special Places to Stay in Ireland (£10.95), and Special Places to Stay in Spain &amp; Portugal (£11.95). A new title, Special Places to Stay in Italy (£10.95), is due out in Spring 2000. All the guides are available in major bookshops, or by credit card order from Alastair Sawday Publishing on; 0117 929 9921. For more information, visit: .