At the turn of the year miserablism is in the air. Pessimism, disgust with everything, ennui, cynicism, all these are enemies of progress: thirst for improvement requires optimism and belief. Yet the desperate (and comical) disease of nostalgia for the past and distaste for the present is in danger of spreading from the dottier pages of the Telegraph and Mail into the blood stream of the nation.Nostalgia, usually a disability of the old, is infecting relatively young people too, as thirtysomethings bewail the mass culture of the moment as somehow more mass and more crass than it was. Where is "authenticity" the cry goes up, as people hunt in vain for things so rare no one else has found them. "Decadence" is all around. Everything is worse, values are gone, rudeness is rife, Britishness is in peril, the future is in the hands of fat kids fixated on PlayStations while bingeing yob culture rules and we're all going to hell in a handcart. (Which antique expression only shows how long people have thought society doomed.)Look at the recent strange crop of moral doom books, some on the bestseller lists. Is It Just Me, Or Is Everything Shit? The encyclopedia of modern life, by thirtysomethings Steve Lowe and Alan McArthur, blasts away with a splenetic nihilism at most of the things most people like best. Lynne Truss in her Talk to the Hand - The Utter Bloody Rudeness of the World Today, is funny and self-aware enough to know her diatribe is ahistorical, but what the hell, she slams into modernity with the same gleeful outrage. Utterly predictable is Digby Anderson's collection of his fellow Telegraph stable of effete moaners shaking their fists under the pompous title Decadence.Let's get one thing clear. This is the golden age - so far. There has never been a better time to be alive in Britain than today, no generation more blessed, never such opportunity for so many. And things are getting better all the time, horizons widening, education spreading, everyone living longer, healthier, safer lives. Unimaginable luxuries and choices are now standard - mobile phones sending pictures everywhere, accessing the universe on the internet and iPods with all the world's music in your ear. Barring calamity, there will be better. Acknowledging steady progress is the only way to prove what more could be done, if we tried harder.Decadence is an empty word, an emotional spasm over a feared falling away from some better era. A Latin word, the Romans felt themselves in perpetual decline from their own mythical beginnings. Plato bemoaned decline long before that. Drop into history anywhere and find this fear that people were once more civil and more civilised, usually at some time set just beyond living memory. In 1431 Christine de Pisan complained about the decline in manners in The City of Ladies. American universities teach a course in "the rise in the culture of American rudeness". This fear of things forever getting worse is irrational: for how can it always have been true? Since when, exactly?It is doubtful people really are ruder now. Different people may be rude in different ways. There was no more disgusting and vulgar rudeness than the way the upper and middle classes treated their battalions of servants in bygone times: see old diaries and novels passim. Nostalgia is unsurprisingly rare among those with any memory of working class roots. That is because nostalgia is almost always thinly disguised snobbery among those choosing to identify with the upper classes, longing for days when people knew their place, you could get good service and a huge underpaid class lived in dread of losing their job or failing to get a reference on the passing whim of the well-heeled if ever they answered back. Read Dickens to see if people were really nicer or politer. For decadence, look no further than the poisonous snobbery of "polite society" Edwardians. As for drunkenness, bingeing was OK for upper-class youth: read Evelyn Waugh.Is mass culture so deplorable? Shopping is the number one leisure activity - nothing wrong with that. A cornucopia of affordable pleasures invites the eye at Ikea. (It is mostly men who inveigh against retail therapy, but is sport any more elevating?) The self-defeating search for the "authentic" is just another kind of snobbery: nothing is worthwhile if everyone else can have it too. "Authentic" is as empty as "decadent", an inchoate, yearning word. What is inauthentic about wearing clothes someone designed for a chain store instead of for a "designer" shop? Nothing wrong with food from a supermarket, those modern miracles of splendour and choice: the old corner shop selling beans, Oxo and white sliced died because it was worse. Meanwhile, more people listen to classical music, buy books and attend blockbuster art exhibitions than ever before. Culture high and low was never more accessible and it thrives. Television was never better either: memory compresses the good bits. As for pop music, we aficionados of Radio 2's Sounds of the Sixties with yer old mate Brian Matthew (Saturdays 8-10am) are weekly reminded of the excruciating dross that rubbed up alongside the greats. It is human to miss things fondly remembered from youth, but it is folly to imagine those things necessarily "better".This disease breaks out in a virulent rash at certain times. Why now? If this year was the worst it gets economically, with only a minor lessening in 10 years of unbroken good growth, maybe there is a vertiginous sense that such a run of good fortune can't last. Or maybe affluence brings with it other expectations: it allows the great "what's it all for?" to loom.There is plenty to be angry about: poverty, ignorance, helplessness, social injustice, environmental depredation (or the walloping million-pound bonuses paid to City bankers in this bad year). The progressive endeavour is to persuade people to want and believe things can always get better and fairer. What has been dismal since the election is Labour's failure to raise those hopes: instead it has swum with the tide of gloom, demanding "respect" from those who receive none themselves. More children stay on at school and achieve, but Labour echoes the mood of the moment - things are worse, youth is worse with much to fear and little to celebrate. Tony Blair's lack of inspirational leadership may now be bizarrely exposed by the Conservatives as Cameron overtakes on the inside, claiming climate change, redistribution and Africa. (It won't last: wait until Bob Geldof and Zac Goldsmith demand things no Tory party could agree.)But Cameron's clever artifice has rightly identified the great lacuna in Blair's leadership: Blair has triangulated away the big issues that engage the heart, while deliberately hiding the redistributive good Labour has done. This current phoney mood that yearns for yesterday is partly a longing for things Blair has always avoided. People - or at least enough of them - enjoy affluence but they want to be asked for altruism too. Craven politicians offering only better management demand nothing noble of the voter. The "better yesterday" syndrome is partly a symptom of Labour's lack of much vision for better tomorrows. New year needs new resolutions from Labour.