Politicians of all parties have fallen into the unctuous habit of praising the work done by "faith communities" without stopping to think. Britain is the most secular country in the world: a BBC poll last week showed that among the young there are more declared non-believers than there are Christians; in all, 43% of 18-24 year olds said they had no faith.Yet this Labour government is introducing great swathes of faith-based education. It leaves most non-believers perplexed. Why should the secular state use tax payers' money to indoctrinate a largely non-believing nation?Remember David Blunkett saying he wished he could bottle the special magic of faith schools? Tony Blair has since then promoted faith schools through academies sponsored by evangelicals who deny Darwin. Two hundred more Muslim state schools are being created. Already a third of all state schools belong to the religions, most of them Christian.What's the magic? It is called selection. One way or another, most faith schools filter out the most chaotic families. If the vicar or the imam has to sign a form saying the family are regular worshippers, that screens out the disaster families - the drug addicts, alcoholics and mentally ill - who have never got it together to go to church. Their children go to the next door school, which sinks under the weight.As one school improves, the other suffers and more hypocritical parents hurry to church to get their child into the religious school. The neighbouring school loses all its best children. Hey presto! There is the faith schools' 'magic'. Religion has become a symbol of respectability to keep out bad kids. How holy is that? All this is backed up by academic research into admissions. To be sure a few church schools don't do this, but they sink down the league tables along with other schools in poor areas - no magic after all.Britain's thriving voluntary sector does a vast amount of good - and some religious organisations do too. Sometimes the church is the only organisation in the worst estates. But some faith-based drug addiction centres, youth clubs and other outfits are naked indoctrination centres - and dangerous.There is good and bad work done by voluntary groups, but the faith groups have no special magic. They do have special dangers, however, with "charismatic" leaders causing a high risk of abuse - mental and physical - wherever there are closed worlds of believers. A Muslim council employee told an Islamic debating meeting I attended last week that he had recently visited a Muslim school where girls were not allowed to look out of the windows. Is that magic too?State money should only be spent on secular schools and social services. People are free to believe and practise what they like, but keep God out of state schools and social services.