The disgusting behaviour of Premier League footballers has shocked the nation, miring the beautiful game in lust and lucre. Greed exceeds goals, obscene cash breeds obscene behaviour. "Who the HELL do you think you are?" screams the Mirror's front page, joining the outrage at these jumped-up boys from nowhere with money to burn. As for the Sun - "You Failed Us" - it was Murdoch who corrupted the game with all this cash. Hypocrisy knows no bounds. But what is all this really about? Leave aside the specific allegations of rape in two incidents where the law will take its course (despite the lynch mob's ready-made verdict). Await judgment on lurid tales of "roasting" young groupies, a story bought for £10,000 by the News of the World from a "party organiser" now himself arrested. At least ask why Rio Ferdinand has been quite so monstered. The other footballers may protest at his treatment, but for once the "spoiled brats" showed some solidarity. After Ferdinand's no-show at a drugs test, "he was entitled to confidentiality and a fair hearing", read their not unreasonable statement. We shall see when those who have broken laws or FA rules are duly tried. Meanwhile, something else is going on here.  Alarm bells should ring whenever the nation - as voiced by the press - is in moral panic mode. Moral panic is when some serious crime is allowed to bleed over from the particular to the general. Moral panic is a slippery elision between a horrible event and the idea that it represents the tip of some unknown iceberg of moral collapse. The murder of James Bulger is the paradigm, when a bizarrely horrible crime tipped the nation into cataclysmic panic about modern parenting and wild children. In that hysterical mood, Michael Howard yelled "Prison works!" and prison numbers have soared ever since.  So let us assume some footballers have been behaving badly, criminally or are even vicious rapists. What fires this furore goes far beyond these particular events. Take this comment on the radio from Brian Glanville, the distinguished football commentator: "I think many black players - in many cases, particularly with young West Indian players - they come from a society in which families are so often fatherless, mothers have to work, children are left all day in the care of minders. They have very little education and then suddenly these uneducated boys are projected into a world in which they are earning, say, £40,000, £50,000 a week. There are no controls."  Foolishly, Glanville may have said a   little too boldly what the leader-writers and all the rest have been saying in code. Oiks from council estates - especially black oiks - are all being paid too much. Even more than you or I in the well-paid commentariat, for God's sake!  There is no moral panic, only disapproval, when grossly moneyed oiks from the upper classes behave badly: Prince Harry, Lord Frederick Windsor, Tom Parker-Bowles, the Marquis of Blandford or Flaming Ferrari James Archer. Glanville blames footballers' lack of education, but no one blames Eton for its failure to impart one iota of intellect or civilisation into some of its yobs, which might see other schools put on special measures. And unlike with footballers, no one ever suggests that the coke-snorting, rampaging toff yobs have too much money. Or that their whole social class should have their unearned incomes confiscated for failing to act as role models to the less fortunate.  This is all about values and the lack of them. Politicians enjoy talking about their "values" in the abstract, but through all three tedious party conferences not a word from the platform was spoken about actual value - in hard cash. What are people worth? Why are they paid what they are? What should be done about obscene pay increases soaring away at the top, while the greatest number of the poor are now in work and earning less than a living wage? This growing fissure is leading to fracturing of pay scales and a new greed at the top that is infecting the public sector too.  While politicians fiddle with marginal questions, economic history will show that failure to take action on this widening chasm was the social disaster of our age. While unbridled greed goes unreproved and untaxed, the public message is that greed is good. It poisons everything, makes collective provision of public services almost impossible, fosters paranoia that others are getting more gravy and breaks the kind of social cohesiveness David Blunkett hammers on about. What chance of building "civil society" in a devil-take-the-hindmost pay structure the politicians dare not even mention?  At least footballers, like rock stars, earn their money in a genuine market. Every time they run out, they have to prove their cash value with their feet. Now compare that with the latest figures for company directors, published today by Income Data Services.  Over the last decade, directors of FTSE-100 companies have seen their incomes rise at six times the rate of other employees. What's more, in this bad year directors in the top 350 FTSE companies had an average increase of 12.9%. Median earnings for top executives is now £1.33m. What for? No one knows. They may or many not do a good job. Their company's success or failure may or may not be down to them. One thing is certain - if there were a referendum on whether they deserve so much, the answer would be a resounding negative. But not a word   about raising top tax even a smidgeon passes Labour's lips, nor a word about dysfunctional payscales and its deleterious effect on productivity.  Here is the moral question politicians duck. Shouldn't there be at least a national conversation about who is worth what and why? Why pick on the golden feet of footballers, just because they came up the hard way? Deserving and undeserving are still concepts people feel passionately about. Letting "the market" rip does not satisfy most people's sense of social justice and, besides, "the market" is largely a myth when it comes to rewards. The state fixes the low pay of care assistants and hospital cleaners, grateful for the pathetic raise to £4.50 an hour they get this month. Remuneration committees steeped in their own pretended "market" fix one another's salaries among   directors. The small pool of experienced hospital and town hall CEOs are now inflating their own pay in pretended competition. Middle-managers, catching the fever, are being paid new multiples above those they manage. Few can offer even a rule-of-thumb justification any longer for what they are paid, except tradition and luck. Examine most pay grades and the myth of a genuine "market" is usually exposed as a fraud.  Footballers are among the few whose pay makes some sort of sense. The affront caused by their incredible salaries is classist - an inverted class envy by the haves against counter-jumping have-nots whose skills are dclass  and undeserving. But where is the tariff to suggest what fair rewards might be? There should be at least some benchmark.