Here we go! The golden generation gets its greedy way again. I long ago predicted that when we, the great postwar boomers (vulgarly known as bulge babies for demographic not fattist reasons), reached retirement, we would refuse to give up what we've got. We would have anti-age discrimination laws so that no one could ever force us out of our jobs. So here we go! Or rather, here we stay forever. Talking about my generation, of course we didn't die before we got old. We lived on and we had it all. There never was a more fortunate time to be born in the west than just after the second world war. Consider how doors opened for us: the national health was created in 1948 for us to be born into, the Butler education act made sure we had universal education. Comprehensives followed: I went to the sixth form of one of the first, full of hope and modernity.The Robbins report opened up a swathe of gleaming new plate-glass universities for us, making Keele, York or Essex newly cool, while the Open University caught late-starters. With our new buying power, 1960s youth stamped our tastes on everything: when we were young, the whole world had to be young with us.  Growing up, we lived through the greatest upward mobility ever known within a generation. Born some 70% into manual working families, by the time we married and had children society had reshaped itself radically: now two-thirds of us are middle class, with home-owning as good a class indicator as any. The nation's wealth and average incomes have more than doubled since we left university.Our pensions may have staggered badly in the crash, but after years of hefty tax breaks that form the unseen middle-class welfare state, most people will still retire better off than our parents ever dreamed. We are also the first generation where many will inherit significant sums from home-owning parents - a windfall in late middle age that is hardly taxed for most - money to secure our children's wealth or to blow on old-age boozing and cruising.  That's the majority story; but for the one third left behind, manual workers suffered the tragic loss of heroic high-paid jobs in coal and steel, replaced by low-grade service work. The class divide is harsh on retirement: the right to work forever is a cruel offer to people cleaning floors or laying tarmac, aching for the day they can pick up their pension. If a secret plan lurks to raise the state retirement age, it must never be for them.  But the lucky two-thirds in our generation were always destined to demand the right to keep our jobs if we want. Now we proclaim that 70 is the new 50, just because we say so: by law no one will be allowed to mention our wrinkles, question our memories or notice our hair dye.Size matters in generations. We, the outsize generation, always had the buying and the voting power to impose our will and tastes on all who come after: Brian Matthew's Sounds of the Sixties (SOTS to aficionados) will still be playing Radio 2's prime time Saturday morning slot when we are 90 (and Brian Matthew is about 110). When we need care, we will divert more public money to the best home care or care homes.  The weaker generations that come after us have not had it so good. They have had a more competitive exam-driven education: the more people who take exams, the greater the penalty for failure. In our time, when only one in seven went to university, many more could still make their own way upwards without qualifications: now exams are the only ladder up. The young work harder than we did, the colossal weight of ever higher mortgages falling harder on them.How did it happen that all the mega-growth in national wealth has not given them an easier life? Where now the earnest debates about what to do with all the leisure that new technology would bring? Technology just makes over-work easier. The nation may be rich, but our children have a harder time than us because the wrong political choices have been made. No one ever asked the voters if they would like time instead of money - a three-day weekend, perhaps, instead of twice the income. For them the era of social progress is over: children of blue-collar families are no longer moving up.  Soon the full weight of our generation will fall upon their frail shoulders - less here than in the rest of Europe - but nonetheless, with 50% soon to be over 50, they will work hard to pay our pensions and our care. That is why encouraging us to work longer is in the end a policy that should ease their burden, as well as please many of us. Luckily, it's win-win for both generations.  A third of 50-year-olds don't work: many are pushed out of jobs, some jump with inducements, others are seduced by Saga brochures but may find their pensions fall short. Some retired assuming they'd get another job - only to meet rigid discrimination in recruitment. Most men aged 60-64 used to work, but now half retire before 65.The early retirement boom took off in the 1980s, encouraged by a government trying to solve its unemployment crisis: but too late it found jobs are never a zero-sum game. Losing jobs done by older workers did not create new work for the young unemployed. Economist Professor Richard Layard says the lesson learned then applies now too: more people staying on will have no effect on opportunities for the young, that's not how labour markets work. The US has had anti-age discrimination laws and no retirement age for 30 years: research shows no ill-effect on the next generation. People working longer pay more tax, add to national output and do better drawing their pensions later.  Will offices be filled with forgetful ditherers? The government's overview of the academic research into ageing makes encouraging reading: "Work performance does not deteriorate with age." A few older people show a marked falling off, dragging down average scores, but the great majority are exceptionally good employees. Yes, they can master new skills and they "work hard and more effectively, think before acting, have better interpersonal skills, work better in teams, are less likely to leave, have lower absenteeism, have better motivation, fewer accidents, more experience and better knowledge of their company".So, not crabby old geezers after all, but precious assets whose memories are organisationally necessary, not fading.  The CBI fears an avalanche of employment tribunal cases with all the trappings of anti-discrimination law. But there is no other way, as the previous code of practice made no impact. Only the law forces culture change. US experience suggests few people do stay on after retirement age - but it does stop people being pushed into it too early.  This will help women greatly: ageism has been a covert discriminator against women. All those returning to work after slowing their careers for children will no longer find themselves branded "too old" even in their mid-30s. For this good news, give thanks yet again to a socially progressive EU directive, as ever pulling Britain forwards.