The middle-aged are the most discontented, reports Mori. They are the most disgruntled. Life seems not to have lived up to their expectations. This is odd, since most of them - at least two-thirds - have seen most things get a great deal better. Twenty years ago the country felt as if it was in freefall - first in the final year of Labour and then in the first years of Mrs Thatcher. Inflation was frighteningly high, unemployment destroyed a whole generation of school-leavers, and managers found themselves suddenly sacked too. The Italians overtook us economically. Insecurity was everywhere. But now we have just lived through a decade of the greatest growth and prosperity in living memory. The country is 35% richer and likely to grow by roughly the same over the next decade - barring disaster. There is more money in most pockets, more work, more home ownership, more holidays, more shopping. Most schools and hospitals have improved. Crime is lower than for a long time. Never have so many people been so educated. Life expectancy grows. Arts and leisure consumption is rising fast. Everything - except inequality - has got better for the majority.  So why the Victor Meldrew nation? Why the grizzling, mizzling, whingeing, whining? Complaint seems to have become a national language for general conversation. You hear it wherever you go, from dry cleaner's to wine bar and dinner table. The country is going to hell in a hand basket. Everything is dumbing down and on the slide, nothing is what it was. Neurotically, anything less than perfect becomes sinisterly symbolic of decline, every minor fault the thin edge of some horrible wedge. There is a panicky lack of proportion, a nervy fear that every shadow foretells the worst. Health scares send shivers down the collective spinelessness, as kitchen surfaces are scoured obsessively with Microban for fear of germs. Science and technology that brought the transforming wonder of the internet among its quantum leaps in discovery are regarded with the kind of superstitious suspicion that would like it burned at the stake. Who would think we had never been safer, wealthier or healthier?  All this is partly engendered by old-fashioned politics. Conservatives in opposition may be powerless, unable to raise the faintest scintilla of support for Iain Duncan Smith. But their mighty press can destroy and spread pessimism. Conservatives, after all, don't believe governments can ever deliver. They seek to demolish not just the achievements of this government but the theory that government itself is good: leave it to the private sector, to the individual family in its fortress, to the strivers on their own, never to the collective. Still outraged and disbelieving at finding themselves under a strong Labour government, the feel-bad Tory press resorts to an ever more bizarre Golden Ageism, set in some unspecified illusory era with a Disneyfied 1950s glow.  The left conspires in this gloom too. Pessimism is its natural state of mind: as long as anything is wrong, everything is wrong. With its own brand of cynicism, it too sneers at mere progress.  In the wider world, some observers suggest an unease about global disorder may disquiet people's sense of well-being. The cold war brought the shadow of the bomb, but keeping an evil empire at bay made grim Manichean sense of world politics. Now, in a world where George Bush holds the reins, everything seems senselessly anarchic.  At home, the performance and innovation unit's report on social capital showed the damage fear does. In Britain, people's trust in one another is far lower than in most of Europe. While the most successful countries - Norway, Switzerland and others - score 65% in trusting other people, Britain lags near the bottom at only 31%. Those who belong to clubs and societies tend to trust people more than those who live in isolation.  This lack of trust among strangers suggests a dysfunction that spills over into road rage and rude driving, not queuing but pushing at bus stops, or sudden anger and abuse in public. The right would say this incivility springs from the hedonistic, selfish, me-first 1960s generation. The left would say it is the fallout from Thatcherite individualistic grabbing in a free-for-all society. Either way, tabloids stoke up the sense that out there is a wild world in which every stranger seeks to do you down, if not to murder your child. Whoever is to blame, the loss of trust is a symptom of social pessimism.  What's to be done? In this mood, the government can keep hitting most of its targets, things can go on improving gradually, yet no one will notice or care, just grumble and sue. They may still vote for the least-worst party, but Labour needs to think harder about the things that make people feel better. Some of these are tangible and practical, others are difficult for politicians to tangle with. Politics trades most comfortably in things easily counted and measured.  Looking for quick hits in happiness, one stands out in every survey, yet again in this one from Mori. Work-life balance surveys of working misery now hit the desk several times a week, all saying the same glaringly obvious thing. In this dementedly overworked country, people are acutely unhappy about their working lives. In paid or unpaid overtime, most say they work too hard and this overwork complaint has soared in less than a decade as hours have lengthened. The government's record on this is disastrous. The only country to reject the EU working time directive, more than 4 million people now work over 48 hours, and many of them not voluntarily: it is a condition of their often low-paid job. (Overwork is not a high-fliers' syndrome.) Why not embrace it and enforce the directive?  The other great work complaint is powerlessness: Professor Michael White finds those who regulate their work harmoniously in consultation with employers are far happier. But again, the government set itself against the EU directive on consultation at work. These things the government can fix, alongside other working rights. Ignore the knee-jerk opposition by employers and devise a work-satisfaction charter. Free the people from their treadmills, shout it loud.  Once contentment is the goal, the mindset changes. What do people really want? What would they trade money for if extra money is not enough? Higher taxes might buy more of what they want: more gardens, swimming pools, classes for education and fun in fine new local buildings, bands in the park with dancing, more carnivals. Or palatial youth centres to delight every disaffected youngster in the neighbourhood.  Above all, politics has to offer a vision of progress, a national aspiration, a sense of purpose and a social trajectory. The third way never lifted the sights or talked of collective progress. It was all about nailing the failures, less about imaginative horizons. The glum country is partly the government's fault.