The right to die at the right time belongs in the liberal canon alongside the right to abortion. People own their bodies and neither church nor state can impose on anyone the obligation to live longer than they wish nor to bear a child against their will. It is an atheist tenet: the living body is all we have, all we inhabit and no higher power summons it to life nor decrees when that life ends. Catholics and other religions are the chief opponents of voluntary euthanasia because for them, only God disposes of life. When I interviewed Mother Teresa years ago, she explained that she would fight against contraception and euthanasia to her dying day because every soul born to starve on Calcutta's streets was still another soul to the glory of God - and every old person who gasped out one more agonising breath somehow contributed to this too. Religious opponents of euthanasia and abortion tend to hide theological objections in the practical problems of framing safe laws - but polls consistently show over 85% believe people should have the right to die when they want. Once life is not holy, people are free to do as they like with their own.  These humanist, post-enlightenment ideas permeate the new Human Rights Act, under which Diane Pretty this week seeks to have her life ended. Liberty, the group taking up her case, cites the right not to be subjected to "inhuman and degrading treatment". Mrs Pretty is in the last stages of motor neurone disease, which paralyses while leaving a lively brain to wait for death by slow suffocation. Her husband would risk a 14-year sentence if he assisted her suicide. Unlike more difficult "living will" cases, where people may no longer be able to express their wishes, she can still communicate via a one-finger typewriter. Suicide may be legal but the law discriminates against disabled people who need help to do it.  All this brings back sad memories. Jill Tweedie, much missed writer of this paper, died in 1993, also suffering from motor neurone disease. Soon after she was diagnosed, she asked me to make sure she could always die whenever she chose. The prospect of death was only bearable if she could at least control the time of her going. She was terrified of leaving it too late, so that like Diane Pretty she would be forced to endure the unendurable. She raged against some pious advisers who urged her to consider Stephen Hawking and all that she might still do. I promised her I would make sure she had the means to die, but I never had to. As she grew weaker, she told me she had already acquired pills which if taken together would be lethal. I thought the time was still far off, for although she could barely walk she seemed still so full of life.  I was to see her the next day, but there was no next day. A friend who saw her just before noticed her breathing was getting slightly wheezy, the first sign of what she feared most - slow asphyxiation. Left briefly alone, without telling anyone she quietly checked herself into a clinic and died that night. There was no doubt in our minds that she committed suicide, not waiting for the final ravages. It was typically stoical and decisive, causing no trouble to anyone, not wanting to leave her body at home as a problem for others. For those of us who thought there was still plenty of time, it was shocking. Couldn't she have waited a bit longer? Why yet? Why so alone when we could have been with her? But it was her decision. Only she knew how much disability she wanted to tolerate and when she had had enough.  Everyone has their own threshold for pain, dignity, the value or not of living another day and how to die. The idea that anyone - family or friends, let alone state or church - should have a say in this most private matter is grotesque. That is what she believed about both euthanasia and abortion and that is how she lived and died.  At the time, not a word was said about it in public. Yesterday, talking to the friend who saw her last, she agreed Jill would have written this herself if she were here to do it, an apt finale to her fine and honest autobiography. As it was, the clinic simply registered her as dead from MND, no autopsy - though they must have wondered. So no one came asking where she got the pills.   But the idea that whoever in the end provided them might be prosecuted is absurd. Maybe she might have lived longer and willingly endured more if only there had been a legal guarantee that she could summon a doctor to give her a gentle injection at any time. But she feared Diane Pretty's fate and feared putting her friends or family at legal risk.  The right-to-die principle may be simple, but under present laws the practice is often cruel. Some time ago, writing about people choosing to die, I visited an old bed-ridden rationalist who had decided to end her life, which had been spent in much campaigning, including for voluntary euthanasia. "I don't want to end up all muddles and puddles," she told me crisply, though in much pain. The day was appointed, her affectionate family assembled, reluctantly agreeing to this last wish. But what seemed like a well-planned death turned out badly. They miscalculated how many pills it would take, how difficult it would be for her to swallow, and she ended up demanding a plastic bag over her head. They were haunted by this horrible scene, so far removed from the deathbed dignity they had planned. Why could she not have requested a doctor's injection?  Another suicidal person I met was a young quadriplegic, a motorcycle-accident victim, who kept saying he would rather be dead. Sport and bikes had been his life and he could not get interested in things of the mind. He too spat at the number of times well-meaning people mentioned Stephen Hawking. Once he drove his electric wheelchair to a nearby river to throw himself in, but at the bank his chair ran out of batteries. Despite much time at Stoke Mandeville with counsellors urging him to live, he set fire to his bungalow. I was unsure whether he should have been helped to die, but his death was horrible.  Allowing assisted suicide may raise Harold Shipman spectres, but the Dutch have done it well with two doctors and an ethicist reviewing every case. They do warn that free care for the old is a necessary safeguard against people feeling under pressure to die rather than use up their children's inheritance. Oregon allows terminal patients to request death, but only after referral for palliative care to ensure their pain is well treated first. As a result Oregon has the best pain-relief in the world and fewer patients choose to die. Meanwhile, thousands of British doctors risk prosecution by kindly helping patients die, while many patients kill themselves ineptly. Diane Pretty's plight must touch anyone who has witnessed her disease. However, the right place for this debate is parliament, with MPs, not judges, making new law.  