Making incapacity benefit claimants display their wounds every three years is, in the prime minister's words, "entirely sensible and justified". These are not wheelchair users or the severely disabled but the many who might be capable of work. In the ongoing march towards full employment, why should the lame and the halt be left out? Long-term unemployment casts people out of society, debilitates and destroys all but the most self-motivated. Work makes most people healthier, wealthier and probably wiser too. It is true that while the numbers of unemployed fell, the numbers on incapacity benefit quadrupled. Successive Tory employment ministers told local managers to shift claimants off the dole on to incapacity benefit (IB). I interviewed a job centre manager in the north-east at the time, who was explicitly ordered to shunt a set number on to IB every month, to make his unemployment figures seem to fall. He had a gun to his head, but he was torn between anger at this political chicanery and a deeper sense that it was all for the best. Shipyard workers in their fifties were not going to find jobs as filing clerks or waiters. If an extra £25 or so found its way into their pockets, it would help the devastated local economy a little. For men who had savings or working wives, there might be no dole at all on offer, so IB was the only way to help. Illegal, yes; disreputable, no - not in these pitiful circumstances. And the government said so too, for its own bad reasons.  This is why the staggeringly high rates of incapacity are all in the places with the highest unemployment figures - in Merthyr Tydfil an extraordinary 26% of all men aged between 16 and 64 signed on for incapacity benefit. (Unemployment does make people ill.) Compare that to Berkshire where everyone has a job and only 5% draw incapacity benefit, most of them seriously disabled. In good employment areas, less seriously disabled people work - some 3m of them. But not surprisingly, where there are no jobs, they don't. Professor Stephen Fothergill of Sheffield Hallam University, expert in incapacity, reckons about half of incapacity claimants could work at something not too strenuous - except that most of them live in places without jobs.  So the question for the government is this. Faced with Merthyr, Knowsley or Liverpool, places overwhelmed by unemployment, why worry about the less healthy, less motivated people until the rest have work first? If the government had an active employment policy for dealing with the wastelands of the coalfields, the dockyards and steel, this might make sense. If jobs galore were being created, if vacancies yawned, then it would be worth chivvying the weak and the depressed into taking them.   But the words "job creation" are not in the chancellor's vocabulary (Alistair Darling is just his mouthpiece). Gordon Brown will have none of this French type of social engineering. Regeneration yes, he says, but job creation - absolutely no. The New Deal has been brilliant in places near enough to jobs.   Personal advisers from the employment service are a higher calibre cadre with an armoury of better offers, spending more money per job-placement than most other countries. But as national employment figures get better, the black spots look worse.  So, why? That is the mystery. At Prime Minister's Questions, the Labour benches were scowling. Not one sycophantic question oozed from any of them. Silent as the grave, not a cheer passed their lips. How can it be, they were asking, that the government has learned so little?   Attacking the disabled is daft politics - even if there are savings to be had. (However, any savings from this are not expected for 10-15 years.) Even if there were some big gain, has the chancellor learned nothing and forgotten nothing? Remember the Daily Mail's campaign to find disabled families suffering under the last reform? Wait for the first quadriplegic to get a threatening letter. (It will happen.) How are the MPs to go back and explain this to their constituencies?  When New Labour first spun its electoral gold, the genius of the project was a deep understanding of political symbolism. With every breath they billowed out smoke signals that could be seen from coast to coast. That red rose may have looked like the logo on a 1950s ladies' sanitary product, but its every petal signified a soft, feminine, gentler party. Ditching Clause IV was an empty enterprise since no one thought Labour likely to nationalise the stock exchange, but it needed doing purely for the sake of the gesture.   Politics needs signposts and symbols, but Tony Blair and Gordon Brown have forgotten. A limping election campaign has been followed by a crippled four weeks, and now every day they shoot another bullet into their feet.  The calamity of the London tube has been another of Gordon Brown's personal madnesses - obstinate, proud and wrong. Yesterday, after four long years of worsening conditions because of his fixation with a particular form of privatisation unsupported by anyone else (not even the PM who tried to ease this impasse), a needlessly lethal row has been added to needless delay. It will now be five years, next April, before it is handed over to Transport for London and work begins. Private finance initiatives everywhere have delayed government spending, as well as hanging a culpable debt on future generations, just to let the chancellor make his spending look more prudent on paper.  Meanwhile, veiled threats on NHS and school privatisation are causing pointless anguish, because neither Blair nor Brown will say that the public sector at its best  is best: few quarrel with using private alternatives at the margins. Why not say roughly what percentage of private provision they have in mind?  Nothing they have said or done since that spectacular second victory tells a strangely disaffected country where the government is going. "Schools and hospitals" was not a direction or a symbol. They are inert things. As a campaign slogan it signified nothing except managerialism.   Every gesture and signpost in the last month has been wrong. No one is pleased. Who is all this directed at? What for? Now there will be wheelchairs chained to Downing Street again. Tony Blair's performance in parliament on Wednesday suggests he doesn't get it. He isn't hearing it. The "project" is reduced to managing targets with no vision.  There is deep dismay on the backbenches. Charles Clarke eloquently reassured Labour MPs on Wednesday about his role, not as dictator of the party but as the missing link between the party and the leadership: he may be the man to carry their message to the leaders.   What is needed now is not show-off rebellions by old parliamentary warhorses, but a united flexing of muscles by Labour MPs to demand consultation so they can stop bad mistakes before they happen. And restore purpose and idealism to their enterprise.