The Millennium Dome is out of sight. Down there in Greenwich, it's a long way from being in your face, even for most Londoners. For the nation, on whose children the prime minister once said the dome should confer "memories so strong that it gives them that abiding sense of purpose and unity that stays with them through the rest of their lives", it could be on another planet. But let memory speak, before the monster goes. It has been the most particular and incontestable folly of our time. The physical distance assists the political amnesia. It's hard to find any politician who will talk about the dome now. Lord Falconer shuffles forward to mutter about an exit strategy, while Chris Smith is compelled, as a coda to the disaster the government set in train, to pour another £29m of lottery money down the Greenwich drain, the better to ensure that this exit, selling off the asset for a fraction of what was put into it, can duly happen. The announcement is as blithe as it is insulting. Otherwise, what's past is past, we're told. Time to move on. Time to talk about Tate Modern, an altogether superior monument built from the pockets of the poor who finance the lottery. The dome? Forget it.  This request I cannot meet. Somehow boredom wouldn't measure up. There was such grandeur here that slinking silently away would do an injustice to history. And history was the frame. Greenwich is the home of time, the government said. This was why   Britain had a special duty to put on a millennial event that would lead the world and startle all who came from the ends of the earth to see it. The dome would "make a statement for the whole nation," said Mr Blair. It was the way for us "to take stock of ourselves". How, by that test, do we look?  The amount of lottery money consumed on the dome is closing in on £550m. Only half the expected audience have so far been willing to pay out of their own pockets for the experience. For this financial failure, they themselves, the British and global public, are to blame. Damn the punters, they inexplicably found better things to do. So the first thing we look, as a nation, is culpable. We let our prophets down. We didn't do what we were told.  But this was because we were not properly informed. The public is one scapegoat, the media are another. Asked a few awkward questions, Michael Heseltine, who can be called the dome's first begetter, was anticipating this before the money had been spent. "It's virtually impossible," he said, "to do anything in this country of any imagination without the media trying to vilify and ruin it." He was highlighting another national defect. We are apparently credulous in overlooking a brilliant creation just because a bunch of malign journalists tell us to. Or so the minister said.  
These are insignificant alibis for the truth. They spread the blame for the humiliating embarrassment the dome has become, so that we are all somehow guilty. Yet there has never been a project that grew so particularly and exclusively out of the preoccupations of the political class, irrespective of party, and the self-glorifying inanity in which its leaders are capable of collaborating as long as someone else pays.  The dome began as a Tory project, the last resounding belch of a dying regime. Promoted by the grandiloquent Heseltine and seized on by the cringing Mr Major, father of the lottery, it was supervised in the early stages by Virginia Bottomley and cheer-led by a variety of architects and propagandists with their own half-baked ideological, not to mention commercial, agenda for this way of proclaiming national greatness past and future - an assertion no other nation in the world felt that 2000 AD required it to make.  An additional rationale was proposed, concerning the renewal of poisoned land on the Greenwich peninsular. But it was never explained why this could be achieved only by the erection of a white elephant consuming, in all, £800m. History, and politics, were at the heart of it. Tories, when drawn into a discussion of their part, still contend that if a thousand years of history   had remained the millennial motif, a triumph was guaranteed. It was New Labour's obsession with modernity, they say, that confused an otherwise flawless project.  But New Labour was on board before the Tories' fall. The consensus was all but sealed. Given the chance in May 1997 to act like a new regime, unneedful of hyperbole, Mr Blair decided he couldn't let the old, dead, corrupted one outflank him in nationalistic display, however pointless. Nobody ever answered the question about what the dome was for, except for that. Miles of verbiage and armies of consultants, up to the very millennial moment, addressed the question of content and purpose, but none was able to improve on Heseltine's best shot: "It's going to be quite wonderful but don't ask me how". They still can't. Made manifest before our eyes, the dome declared its irretrievable emptiness.  Many political projects turn out to be less than perfect. Most, indeed, can never hope to succeed in anything but a contingent and partial way. There are always more schools to build and patients to cure. For that reason the political rhetoric attaching to them is almost meant to be taken with a shovelful of salt. The level of pretension is understood to be an aspiration, the money available for its fulfilment is always inadequate. Blaming politicians for their failure is often a ritual that they can deflect with earnest remarks about the sincerity of their efforts. And besides, there's always another party, putting them to the question.  The dome is a different case. Normal lines of responsibility do not exist. It was built with funny money, for which nobody is accountable. The Treasury would never have countenanced tax money being used. No business could have defended such folly to its shareholders. Lottery money, falling outside either discipline, was made available as a plaything for egotistical wasters who invented a national purpose that did not exist. Not a little matter of a few million, either, but a donation of colossal magnitude, deployed by the same people who decided it should be handed out: people of all parties with their fingers in the trough of self-indulgence, leaving none with hands clean enough to do the ensuing scandal justice.  What one misses here is the faintest semblance of regret. No whisper have I heard, from the principals or their auxiliaries, that they may have been responsible for a mistake. Apology seems out of the question. When not whimpering a few resentful words that miss the point, they are silent. They're moving on. The dome was yesterday. Just another well-meaning blip in the awkward lives of politicians committed to national renewal. But it wasn't. It was an avoidable idiocy, which leaves Britain looking like a nation led astray by profligate, self- regarding philistines.