Stephen Byers made yet another statement about local government yesterday. He introduced a white paper on the topic.  He was saying that local authorities should have more power to run themselves. "The white paper is based on a belief that we don't need to control everything," he said to cackles of merry laughter from Tories, who believe that the minister would happily dictate how many sugars all councillors get in their tea.  It can be a little alarming to hear Mr Byers. He swerves from plain English to meaningless jargon.  So he will say something ordinary, such as: "People expect a great deal from their council"; a few moments later he's banging on about "scaling back the number of area-based initiatives and giving greater scope to rationalise partnerships".  Eh? Just as we're waiting for our brains to settle down, he's talking about the "receipts taken into account mechanism", "pre-announced universal capping", and "specifying outcome targets".  But this kind of talk infects everyone. Even Theresa May, his Tory opposite number, talked about "unitarisation by creep", not, in this case, a reference to Mr Byers.  So I turned to the white paper itself, hoping to find some explanation for these arcane phrases. The first page I opened was about "best value parishes". What? Are there supermarkets that advertise these? "Try our best value parishes. Buy Great Struddington and get Bishopham Parva free!"  The whole document is a feast of bizarre verbal constructions. It announces the "piloting of a new policy evaluation tool". Then, we're "focusing on input and relegating the achievement of outcomes"; "effective service delivery building on the new well-being powers and local strategic partnerships".  There are acronyms, so many of them, mostly three letters so they look like those airport codes they put on your luggage: CCT, BCA, HIP, EAZ, HRA, RRO, AMP - and so on and on. I counted 31, but I'm sure there are many I missed.  There are curious, unexplained bodies which presumably include people, but who can say? Somebody must belong to the Best Value Inspectorate Forum and the Strategic Partnering Task Force. (They have lots of important capital letters.)  There must also be those who understand concepts such as "developing social capital by supporting civic engagement" or else "exciting and genuinely inclusive approaches to partnership" or "the Regional Co-ordination Units review of area-based initiatives will help reduce the number of partnerships associated with these initiatives".  I suspect that each phrase originally meant something. It was coined to describe a real body, or plan, or proposal. But then the words were attached to each other, like a small child using Lego, so that a big, weird thing is created. It somehow hangs together but has no relation to anything in the real world.  So we have "local partners should not have to wait for these deregulatory initiatives to bite", as in "the dogs of deregulatory initiatives will soon bite the postman's trousers of over-centralised bureaucracy ..." Or, "we will task the Best Value Inspectorate Forum and the Audit Commission with delivering the new inspection regime ..."  What does all that mean for schools, buses, libraries and dustbins? I fear I cannot help you.