Tony Blair walked down an illuminated catwalk. "Tonight, live from Leeds, Ask The Prime Minister!" a voice declaimed, and tingly music played. The lights cast shadows from below, so he looked like your uncle pretending to be a ghost on Christmas Eve. It was like the opening of Who Wants To Be A Millionaire, and the prime minister had won the fastest finger round. In such ways does art imitate tripe.  "Well," he said at one point, "it's the only time I get the chance to talk to people direct and not through newspapers," though on occasion the experience seemed to have brought him close to panic. You can always tell, because his eyes glaze over, like Bambi hearing the bad news about his mother.  It's so much easier tackling William Hague. You felt he wanted Jonathan Dimbleby (surely the winner of the Leeds heat in the George W Bush lookalike contest) to tell him he still had one lifeline: shoot the audience.  The programme was on ITV, and the overall effect was curiously disjointed. The questioners depicted a country in which the infrastructure had collapsed, where health care is rationed, and our teachers and police are quitting in thousands, leaving packs of uneducated, feral youngsters to terrorise the land.  Yet the frequent ads which interrupted told the opposite story: the workers of Britain are buying computers, luxury Belgian chocolates, gourmet frozen food, scented unguents, and brand new BMW cars.  Which picture of Britain is right? Why, both are, of course. This is a nation where most people have stacks of money to buy things, yet nobody seems to be able to provide services.  The audience began with train services. "Ah want to be open with you," Mr Blair vouchsafed, "it's absolute hell travelling on the railways at the present time" - as if we didn't know. But, he added, some of the speed restrictions were "over the top".  Mr Dimbleby inquired if this meant Railtrack was "taking us all for a ride", which of course is the one thing they cannot manage. The prime minister was opposed to the "risk-aversion" which had "crept into the system", yet said that "the safety" (he has been absorbing Prescott-speak) had to come first. "You're saying two different things," Mr Bush - sorry, Mr Dimbleby - pointed out. A cynic might say that this was because he's a politician; I suspect he was merely tired. Four days in Nice; sleep deprivation always catches up with you.  "Police numbers are down, crime is up. That's not a very good record, is it?" he was asked. "It's not a matter of statistics," he said wearily, but of course that's exactly what all recent British governments have tried to reduce every problem to.  On the NHS, he declared again: "I genuinely believe the glass is half full, not half empty," a phrase which is half meaningful and half gibberish. We saw one flash of real passion when a woman complained that her mother had to wait 68 weeks for surgery. "I accept it's my responsibility to turn the system round. I'm doing my very level best," he said, and looked as though he meant it. The famous glassy smile was absent; he seems to realise it doesn't work any more.  A woman shouted from the back that the Tories had always looked after their own. "You haven't looked after ours!" she added, and was cheered by the audience. But then he was cheered for his reply: "I don't intend to be a leftwing Margaret Thatcher. That's not what I'm about."  And the man who attacked the euro was jeered by the audience. Mr Blair finished strongly, but he may find today's question time rather easier.