Normally a reshuffle in parliament is the equivalent of the last day of summer term, the opening night of a West End musical and Grand National weekend. It's a great event but it's also a ceremony, with customs and traditions that must be strictly observed.  It also brings hours of gleeful free-wheeling speculation, a fever of wild surmise, in which disappointment at your own failure is matched only by the sheer joy of seeing a colleague fired.  Yesterday, however, was very quiet. For a start, most of the day there was only one piece of news: the resignation of Alan Milburn.  We lipsmackingly assumed that this was for a pleasingly disreputable reason, involving money or women or both. Then as the day wore on, it became clear that the reason he gave - he wanted to spend more time with his family - might actually prove to be true. In fact, it probably was true.  No wonder there were so many long faces. As the poet Marriott Edgar put it in his best-known work, Albert and the Lion, "there were nothing to laugh at at all."  He is to spend more time with his family? Has it come to this? Milburn's departure demeaned every one of them by implying that there is something more important than politics. Perhaps the News of the World will save them on Sunday.  In the meantime, as one Labour MP said gloomily: "What makes him think that his family wants to spend more time with him?"  In the chamber Gordon Brown was answering questions. As our prime minister (home affairs) he is obviously more powerful than Tony Blair, who is prime minister (wars and foreigners). Yet somehow it is still Blair who has the exquisite pleasure of promoting and demoting, giving some the hope of glory and others the excruciating pain of dismissal. It is all desperately unfair.  No wonder Brown looked cross. He coped with a long assault from Michael Howard, the shadow chancellor, like a first officer on auto-pilot, his feet up on the control panel.  He abused the Tories for having gone into the European exchange mechanism too early, and when they bellowed back "you supported it!" he went into a superb mock rage: "Oh, no, I am to blame for what they did!" he yelled, before going into a rent-a-rant about the Tories' 10% inflation rates, 15% interest, negative equity and 1 million lost jobs. But he just read out from the tickertape in his head, chanted like a regular churchgoer working through the apostles' creed yet again. His heart was not in it.  Next we heard from Dr John Reid, veteran of a thousand vicious wars in the Scottish Labour party. His Tory opposite number, Eric Forth, asked sarcastically if he would be much longer in his job as leader of the house.  "I have grown to love not only this job, but also the opposition front bench," he said, almost sincerely. "I look forward to staying here for a long time, in the knowledge that, as Professor Stephen Hawking reminds us, time is a very relative thing."  Five hours later he was our new health secretary, and there are rumours around the Commons that he might last a month or even longer.  Dr Reid is himself a doctor, though his doctorate is in economic history rather than medicine. Medical doctors have the job of healing those who are sick or in pain.  Dr Reid's political style, by contrast, is as someone who would like to put more business their way, as the doctors will discover soon enough.  All of which left one more fascinating question for MPs: who will get the lord chancellor's flat and the use of his fabulous wallpaper?