Gordon Brown launched his pre-leadership - sorry, his pre-budget - report yesterday. As usual this consisted largely of Gordon boasting about the state of the economy. He does this by preening himself on the good news and leaving out the bad. He reminds me of those match reports you get in football programmes, in which the home side's goals are lovingly described and any scored by the opposition more or less ignored, so it comes as something of a surprise to discover that the other lot won 5-2.  But before that we had Michael Howard in a terrific bate. He was furious because the government has started to run a radio ad about top-up fees. It's pretty clear that he's on to something, since you're not allowed to spend public money advertising a policy which hasn't even gone through the Commons. But why on earth would that stop this government? They do what they damn well please.  But even more appalling was the language the ad uses. It's meant to be a jokey version of teenage slang, which is translated by someone with a sort of BBC accent.  "Ya cough up zip till ya blinging," quoted Mr Howard, with the air of somebody removing diarrhoetic sheep droppings from his shoe.  In the transcript in front of me, the ad actually says, "ya cough up zip till ya minted." It goes on to explain the policy in more detail: "The mega news is that the darty government posse will help you through uni by shelling out the clam."  Listeners are exhorted thus: "So, peg it man, don't veg it."  Only a civil servant could come up with such a weird mixture of outdated, inapt and entirely non-existent slang. Can you imagine any one at all understanding a word? And if they really did understand it, would they be the kind of person who might benefit from a university course, instead of, say, being eaten by German cannibals?  Mr Blair failed to answer the question seven times, and so we moved on to Gordon Brown. To paraphrase his report, the clam situation was first-rate. His darty policies had left the entire nation minted. He was blinging home the economic bacon.  He produced a huge flurry of statistics, burying the house in a mass of paper like the England rugby team last Monday. Hundreds of them flew past: "In France, 3.9, in Japan 6.9, in Britain only 2.4!" he announced. Figures whizzed by us: 5.5, 49, 6.3bn and 1.9% being some of the more exciting ones to pass on to you.  Behind him his posse, the 150-odd MPs who have signed the motion against top-up fees, cheered. They are the Dunfermline Massive, who will follow him anywhere, looking for a "ruck" with the hated Sedgefield Rude Boys.  His self-satisfaction knew no bounds. The mega news was that the economy had been growing continuously for the longest period since, ooh, since toothless peasants lived in wattle and daub houses, eating woad for supper.  The bad news - that he has had to borrow £37bn, far more than he predicted and rather more clam than seems prudent - was gabbled through at speed in the midst of another passage about the appalling state of benighted foreign economies.  (This is the equivalent of saying, "while it is true that we gave away seven goals in the course of the match, this is fewer than a fifth of the goals Arsenal conceded in the whole of the last season!")  But none of this mattered. The nation was blinging, the populace minted, unemployment was close to zip, and the Treasury as darty as the dartiest thing could be.  In the timeless words of the government's radio ad: "Don't sack it, braw."