Another Michael Howard event, and once again, it was total madness and confusion!  The new Tory leader is the opposite of Mr Bean. Whereas Rowan Atkinson leaves chaos in his wake, the mayhem always precedes Mr Howard.  There is much shouting, and jeering; small scuffles break out. Innocent hacks are felled by camera tripods; bags full of heavy metallic kit create as much havoc as any Swedish backpacker on the rush hour Northern line. Times are put back then brought forward. Nobody seems to have any idea of what is going on, least of all the leader's staff.  But first we had a chance to listen to my old friend Michael Fabricant, asking ministers in the Commons about human remains. It seemed wonderfully apposite now that one of the undead has taken over his party. Human remains, said Mickey, needed to be sent back to the countries they came from. Native Americans, Australians and New Zealanders wanted these bones returned. Apparently they were a sort of ossuary version of the Elgin marbles. "So where are we now?" he demanded.  "Sitting on the second bench, not on the frontbench," snapped Estelle Morris, the junior minister, and prescient it was too, since a few minutes later we learned that Mickey has not made it to the shadow cabinet.  Mind you, very few people have. The dozen people in the new shadow cabinet were meeting in their special oak panelled room in a small, spooky eyrie of the Palace of Westminster. It looks like the kind of place Harry Potter might have discovered around chapter 13.  We were ushered into the anteroom, where it was made clear that only photo-graphers would be allowed in. A bumptious young Aussie, who may soon be repatriated either fully fleshed or in bone form if he keeps this up, stroppily ordered people out. The temperature mounted. The hubbub increased. It was a Michael Howard moment.  Then finally there was a slight creaking noise and one of the bookshelves swung open to reveal - a secret door! Yes, the books were all fakes, just the spines of works by Cowper and the romantic poets. Plus a book called British Fossils, which was no doubt the one you had to press to gain access to this new cabinet of the shadows.  And then, behind the hidden panelling, looking rather like Voldemort and his sales team, there they were. We pushed past the stroppy Aussie to get a quick look.  Out had gone fuddy-duddy old shadow foreign secretary Michael Ancram, and in was young, thrusting, go-ahead shadow foreign secretary, Michael Ancram!  It was "sayonara" to failed party chairwoman, Theresa May, and a big "hai" to the new environment spokes-woman, Theresa May!  And we welcomed back an exciting new face from the last Thatcher government, David Curry. Unlike his namesake Edwina, Mr Curry was shafted by William Hague and IDS rather than John Major. His job, which includes being "shadow secretary of state for devolved government affairs", might not be quite as glamorous as it sounds. After all, what's the point of being in charge of everything that someone else is in charge of? Mr Major also turns up in the new Conservative party advisory council, which includes, we were told solemnly. "a rich array of talent".  This rich array consists of: Mr Major, IDS, William Hague and Ken Clarke, truly a legion of the lost!  "They are," said a spokes-man, "all people who have a tremendous contribution to make to the future of our party, but can't be arsed."  No, of course he didn't! I made that up. But it's what he meant.