Listening to Tony Blair's speech on Tuesday (it was less impressive in the hall than on TV, but these days there is no substitute for watching something on television) I reflected on how he has taken on the burdens of the whole world yet seems incapable of dominating his own government. You hear more and more stories about how Gordon Brown overrules both his boss and other ministers, sometimes apparently for the hell of it, just for the pleasure of demonstrating who is the real boss. I asked someone who knows the situation well, and they said, "the trouble is that Tony is weak. He isn't capable of standing up to Gordon and he almost never does." I do not know the reason for this, though I suspect it is psychological. Most politics is about personalities, and politicians mainly hammer on about "issues" and "values" to distract attention from the real reason they do things, which is because they feel an urgent need to. Blair still senses Brown as a big brother to whom he must defer, and Brown plays along with this urge for reasons of his own considerable vanity and insecurity.  • In the past, we hacks have always preferred Brighton to Blackpool for the conferences, but times have changed. The new City of Brighton and Hove looks awfully seedy these days. The appalling tower blocks and the NCP car park dumped among the Georgian houses have been a disgrace for decades, but the once fine West Street is now a shambles. A dispute with the privatised refuse collection company means that rubbish is piled in the streets and plastic bags billow around in the offshore wind.  There are still compensations. The Lanes are still okay. I love sitting outside the Melrose restaurant on a sunny day squinting out to sea while eating delicious, ridiculously cheap, fish and chips. I like to have a drink in the Regency pub, just off Regency Square, comfy and cosy and decorated so that you expect to see Jane Austen behind the bar pulling pints. But too many shops are boarded up, and the traffic lights have been cleverly timed to keep cars on the road for as long as possible. So you decide to walk, but must hike past lines of stationary vehicles pumping out fumes. Blackpool, meanwhile, is improving.  • I bumped into Peter Hain, once again a foreign office minister, at one of the surprisingly perky conference parties. As we chatted about this and that, he took a mobile phone call, and barked "yes?" I had a sudden fantasy that he would listen for three seconds, yell "Holy shit! This is the big one!", hurl the phone aside and charge towards the basement, scattering drinks, waiters and delegates as he ran. But it was something quite routine. As David Blunkett told us the other day, "we are now safer than we were on September 10." Maybe so, but it does not feel that way.  • There are many warning signs to tell you that you are growing old. Being pleased not to be invited out on Saturday night is one. Making comfy "oomph" noises when you get out of a chair is another. I suffer increasingly from what I have come to think of as Victor Meldrew moments. The other night I was woken at around 5.25am by a banging which seemed to come from inside the house. So I got up for a look, and realised I had heard the first wave of bin men who dump your plastic sacks on the pavement. So I thought I would go to the loo, and managed to crash over the suitcase I had failed to unpack but left at the end of the bed. Somehow I got caught up with the zip and lock thing, which managed to rip a long hole in the sole of my foot, so I walked back from the toilet in considerable pain.  I could not risk waking my wife by putting on the light and conducting a search for Savlon and plasters, so I lay awake in bed certain I was about to get tetanus. An hour later, just as I was finally drifting off again, I was jerked awake by the second phalanx of bin men, operating a hoist which sounds like fighters landing on an aircraft carrier.  After an age, it roared away, setting off someone's car alarm. At such moments I ask, "what would Victor have done?" so I went downstairs, put on the kettle, and wondered if I would ever sleep, or even walk, again.  • A little girl at our daughter's school was killed by a motorbike this week. She had been running for the bus. She had only joined the school last month. An event like this casts a terrible gloom over a school. As for her parents, who I do not know, we can begin to imagine their grief but cannot bear to contemplate it. I have known people who have lost young children, and something disappears from them for ever.  They can look cheerful and even laugh and joke, but you never see their eyes smile. Part of them has died with the child.  There is no crossing outside the school, only a traffic island. It is a secondary school so there is no lollipop lady. It is on a long, fast and busy road. I cannot understand why in this country it is not mandatory to have pelican crossings outside all schools situated on main roads. Or 10mph limits when the children are coming and going, enforced by speed cameras with - an innovation this - film inside them. Do we not care about our children? I know that if we wanted to abolish all road deaths we would have to abolish cars.  But surely there is a trade-off here, and the life of a child is worth more than the few seconds saved by each driver as he hurtles towards the next tailback.  • I found myself sitting on a train the other day, across the aisle from the wonderful Jennifer Ehle, who played Elizabeth Bennet in the last TV Pride and Prejudice. (No, I didn't say hello. If you were a gorgeous young actress would you like to be approached by a balding middle aged hack with a cheese sandwich in one hand and a can of Stella in the other? I think not.)  But it made me want again to write Pride and Prejudice for our local community panto, which is coming up soon. (Tony Blair wants to use the power of community to end crime, world hunger and environmental degradation. In our community we can just about run to a panto.) There are such great set pieces. The Bingleys' ball, the first great confrontation between Darcy and Elizabeth, the wedding. I also wanted a naughty vicar. (Mrs Bennet: "I adore riding, vicar. I can think of nothing more agreeable than putting my foot in one stirrup and throwing my leg over. Do you care to get your leg over, vicar?")  But my friends and neighbours suspect that the children would not understand the plot, and the adults will think it a demeaning attack on a loved classic. So I expect we will end up with Jack and the Beanstalk instead.