Tony Blair does victory very well. You could say, if you were sycophantically inclined, that he's getting more practice. His style, as it was after the Kosovo campaign, is to be quiet, understated, cautious and not - oh, most definitely not - to gloat. But then he doesn't need to gloat. He has people to do his gloating for him.  Perhaps the most surprising gloater yesterday, after a statement on the military position in Afghanistan, was Iain Duncan Smith, who sat with that fine bald pate covered by at least half an inch of make-up. (I suspect Mr Duncan Smith believes that William Hague lost because his dome shone like the spotlight at a rock concert.)  "Clearly," Mr Duncan Smith said, "what has happened in Afghanistan is a complete vindication of the strategy pursued by the coalition, led in great degree by the prime minister and his government."  Heavens, Mr Blair himself would never have dared go so far. How lucky he is to have a leader of the opposition who says it for him! Mr Duncan Smith may be the first Tory to win the greasy spoon award for toadying to the prime minister.  David Winnick, who has never faltered as a member of the warmongering party, demanded that Mr Blair's critics, "including those in this house, should accept that they were wrong, as they were wrong over Kosovo, and now accept the error of their ways". As he spoke, he wriggled with pleasure. Even a former Tory chief whip, James Arbuthnot, joined in the hosannas: "May I congratulate the prime minister and his government on the way they have handled this!"  They were hurling haloes across the chamber like quoits on the deck of a cruise ship. A cynic might imagine that the Conservatives merely hoped their fulsome praise would split the Labour party, but it's far too late for that.  "Gorgeous" George Galloway, whose coruscating speeches against the bombing helped secure him the prestigious Spectator/Zurich debater of the year award last week, tragically had another engagement and so was unable to apologise in person.  Others were less retiring. Harry Barnes begged for an end to the bombing, now that so many military objectives have been achieved.  Mr Blair almost permitted himself a gloatette. "I can honestly say to my hon friend, I mean, the trouble with the point he is making is that his credibility could have been improved if he had not made exactly the same point a week ago."  Tam Dalyell, having seen his earlier predictions crumble, now has a horrifying new one: Pakistani militants with atomic weapons. Honestly, some people are never happy. There are Labour backbenchers who won't feel their life's work has been validated until an atomic bomb lands near Buckingham Palace.  Other critics, such as Jeremy Corbyn, are now concentrating their fire on the Northern Alliance.  Bob Marshall-Andrews wanted an end to the plan of locking up bearded men without charge or trial. Mr Blair, in full non-gloating mode, gave him a regretful but considered reply.  But where, we asked, was the greatest gloater of them all? Where gloaters gather, one name dominates their discourse, that of a man who is to gloating what Tiger Woods is to golf. He is the daisycutter in the gloaters' bomb bay, a man whose gloating can clear an area 600 yards wide, leaving behind a carpet of destruction and despair.  But for some reason Gerald Kaufman was nowhere to be seen. No doubt he will be deployed later, if things turn horribly wrong.