Tony Blair made his first Commons statement about the bombing of Serbia. In general, it was the pacifists who were most bellicose. The warmongers seemed quiet in comparison.  After half an hour I worked out what the tone of the whole event reminded me of. It was a late-night phone-in on a provincial radio station.  The presenter is a mild and affable fellow. All he really wants to do is to play records by the Carpenters, but the lines are humming with loonies. Few of them are first-time callers; most take part every night, and the DJ must groan when each familiar voice comes on the line.  Take Sir Peter Tapsell. Sir Peter is the opposite of a stealth MP. If he appeared on Serb radar, they'd think they were being attacked by a fleet of Zeppelins. Massive, overbearing and overweening, swathed in yards of the finest suiting, face permanently tanned as if lit from within by the furnace of his tremendous self-esteem, Sir Peter would be a majestic figure if he were not quite so silly.  Just when the Prime Minister wanted to calm things down 'and now for those of you who have ever been in love, here's that great romantic number, Close To You...' Sir Peter phones in, booming slowly and portentously, as if instead of Hansard reporters there was a team of monks in the gallery scribbling his deathless words on vellum.  'Does the Prime Minister realise how twagically! [Sir Peter has a slight speech impediment] Apt! It was for him to go to Berlin. To explain why he is the leading European advocate of.  'A histowically ignowant.  'Politically inept.  'Internationally illegal!  'And half-botched policy, which is already threatening to increase and extend the carnage in the Balkans!  'Is he determined to prove himself. As STUPID. As The Kaiser?'  Sir Peter sat down to jeers from Labour. I almost felt sorry for him, an elderly man beset by louts, though I suspect it is an occupational hazard for those who believe themselves to be The Foghorn Of History warning that The Ship Of State is about to hit the Rocks of Misguided Foreign Entanglements. Like many DJs, Tonee does witter at times. Rather like the present military engagement, his sentences start out with bravura and flair, but no-one is quite certain how, if ever, they will end.  'There is no doubt about what is happening, you know, the idea that this has only been going on since the Nato bombing, it has been going on and on and on...' (That was an actual quote).  'Yes, you're on the air, caller!'  'Tony Benn here, what I say is, look, Tonee, I reckon, you should bring in someone with international status, like that Nelson Mandela, to bring the sides together. Catch my drift, Tonee?' (I have slightly adjusted Mr Benn's actual words to convey the full flavour of what he said.)  This was presumably Mr Benn's reaction to the question which is often asked of him: what on earth would you do? However, the notion that Mr Milosevic would pay the faintest heed to Nelson Mandela, or Richard Branson or Jerry Springer for that matter, brought, I regret to say, more titters from the benches.  It was Martin Bell who brought a distinct, late-night chill to the phone-in when he said, in his understated yet deeply pessimistic tone, that it was inevitable that at some point we would need to commit ground troops.  'If the political will is not there, let us admit it is not there, hang our heads, and walk away in shame.'  Mr Blair always responds to Mr Bell, who scratches at his conscience in a way Sir Peter never could. He put aside his copy of Gilbert O'Sullivan's Greatest Hits, and replied firmly and clearly: 'I have no doubt at all that we shall succeed in our objective. We must have complete and total resolve to see it through to the end.'