Once a month the Commons gets a chance to question the Church of England - or rather, its representative on earth, an MP who is also a church commissioner, presently Stuart Bell. Like a church, the chamber is hushed and almost empty. One vaguely imagines a few old maids cycling through the morning mist to get here, someone from the WI popping in to replace the flowers, and the vicar making silly announcements: "The parish Young Mothers meet every Wednesday at 4pm. Would anyone wishing to become a young mother please see me in the crypt after the service."  Mr Bell, who represents the seat of Middlesbrough, used to sound perfectly normal. Now he has stopped speaking but rather intones. Instead of answers, he gives responses.  It's very C of E, not at all happy-clappy. Mr Bell would be ill at ease in the kind of revivalist church where the minister has to say: "Hands down anyone who wants coffee after the service."  Take, for example, his disquisition yesterday on the subject of cycle paths. Any half-competent vicar could get a sermon out of that. (Unless he misheard it and talked about psychopaths, of the type Jack Straw wants to lock up even before they commit a crime.)  "You know, recently one of our courts, in their wisdom, ruled in favour of a cyclist who had wobbled out of the cycle path and had been hit by a car. The judge said that the cyclist should be permitted 'wobble room'. Don't we all need some wobble room in our lives? I know I do. And whenever we do wobble, then Jesus is there to grab hold of our saddle ..."  Actually Rev. Bell didn't say exactly that. He had been asked by Anthony Steen MP what the church's policy was about people cycling on its land. "In my reading of Hansard," he murmured, "at 4am, when I cannot get to sleep, I see that you have been asking similar questions since 1992."  This hardly amounted to an answer. We all know that life is full of unanswered questions. But there is no question at all that if you put your faith in the Lord...  Mr Steen was not satisfied. "On one of the most beautiful stretches of the river Dart, there is no cycle path, because the church is netting vast profits from anglers!" he said, going on to add: "Is this consistent with cardinal or temporal virtues?"  That was the most unusual parliamentary question I have heard for some time, and almost impossible to answer. What could Mr Bell say? "You know, there was no cycle path by the Sea of Galilee, yet Jesus himself netted vast shoals of souls there," he might have tried, but didn't. Instead, he followed another ancient Church of England tradition and waffled amiably.  Earlier he had been tackled on the subject of ethical investments. He pointed out that the church had strict rules about where it stores its earthly riches, "in order to raise standards of ethical excellence in corporate life." Recently this had meant that the church's portfolio had "significantly outperformed other pension funds and world markets' benchmark." "The wages of virtue are certainly better than the wages of sin," he added. "I am happy to be on the side of the angels." (Mr Bell is the only MP who means this literally.)  Dennis Skinner rumbled to his feet. "At least the ethical investments of the Church of England are more closely monitored than the ethical investments of the Tory party treasurer..."  "Nice try!" said the speaker, shutting him up like a lager lout who had wandered into church.