This was the big event of the day. Lady Thatcher felt so strongly about General Pinochet that she planned her first Tory conference speech for nine years - and had even waived her usual $50,000 fee. We were a deeply privileged group - we were to get the old bat gratis. Mad cow would offer comfort to mad dictator. Delegates fled the main conference hall to get seats for her meeting.  Many didn't even wait to hear the agriculture spokesman, Tim Yeo (motto: "we plough the fields and scatter the good seed wherever we get the chance.") Off they went to the ABC cinema (which had cancelled its regular showing of The Haunting).  We waited. For ages. On the screen was a picture of General Pinochet smiling and laughing, surrounded by happy children, many of whom had probably never been tortured.  The Tory party is beginning to look like the Labour party in the early 80s. Ranting. Bonkers. Obsessed by single issues. Out of touch with everyone except itself.  On one side was the slogan "Free Pinochet - Britain's Only Political Prisoner". This poor wretch, we were led to contemplate, imprisoned in the Virginia Water gulag, trying to survive on three meals a day, groaning under the lash of his captors who force him to sit in a comfy chair all day.  Finally there was a loud cheer and prolonged clapping. That was just for Denis Thatcher. When, two minutes later, the President For Life and Global Leader of the World Institute of Thatcherology arrived, they went berserk.  This, you could hear implied in the yells, was a real leader, not the wimps we've had to put up with since 1990.  Norman Lamont, the meeting's chairman, moved forwards to welcome her. We were at a meeting of the Death To John Major faction of the Free Pinochet movement. Don't go near any football stadiums, John!  There were many warm-up speakers, including several from Chile. (I often wonder why our own rightwing, since they love the old boy so much, have never learned to pronounce his name. All the Chileans called him "Pea-no-chett", with the last syllable a homophone of "check". It doesn't rhyme with chardonnay.)  "General Pin O'Shea" - as Norman Lamont said it - "helped make the world safe for Tony Blair, but he was in CND at the time!"  To these people Tony Blair is the Salvador Allende of Britain, leading an irreversible Marxist revolution through highly motivated cadres of businessmen who can pay £500 a plate for dinner.  Finally it was her turn. "My friendsh," she said (she's got that sibilant "s", a little like Tony Benn, only more pronounced these days) "It's nine years since I spoke at a Conservative party conference. A lot has happened since then - and not much of it for the better."  A reference to the three great enemies in her life: in ascending order of wickedness, Tony Blair, William Hague, and John Major, the Trotsky of her revolutionary force.  She described how Pinochet had helped the British in the Falklands by offering airforce intelligence. On the day they switched it off - "for overdue maintenance" - we lost two ships. They turned it off for maintenance? That's the kind of excuse London Transport offers.  Her speech read more angry than it sounded.  "We know that he was arrested by night, on his bed of pain, in circumstances which would do credit to a police state ... I have never thought in my lifetime to see the honour of Britain and the reputation of British justice so demeaned as in this affair." But the force of her words was blunted by the tired way she spoke. This is not a woman who could raise a rabble from scratch any more.  "There are implications for heds of government everywhere, as they see that they may be hauled out of hospital in a foreign country at dead of night to face some trumped up charge..."  Who needs a foreign country? She has plenty of people who'd like to haul her out of Blackpool, right now.  The words were full of fury, but the voice was faded. Some heat remains in there, but the fires are banked.