MPs knew that Jack Straw was sending Pinochet home, but he had to drag himself into the chamber to tell them in person. He looked pretty glum, but not half as glum as the MPs behind him. They were as woebegone as I can remember: eyes downcast, arms folded, shoulders hunched. Even junior ministers Mike O'Brien and Charles Clarke looked as cheery as Eeyore stuck on a Virgin train on a wet Tuesday near Widnes.  Of course nothing bucks up the Tories so much as seeing the other lot being hangdog, and they were all fairly merry. Lord Lamont (the head of "Tories for Torture" as Denis MacShane put it later) looked almost jubilant as he watched from the peers' gallery. And he was right to be so. No murderous despot could have hoped for a more loyal friend.  Mr Straw grimly ploughed his way through the vexed history of the affair. He had, he said, assembled a medical team of "outstanding national and international reputation" to give - and I paraphrase - the old bastard a once-over. He was grateful to these doctors. "They have performed a very significant public service," he said, to which Edward Leigh yelled happily: "They got you off the hook, Jack!"  Mr Straw said he had agreed to pass the medics' report to Spain, Belgium, France and Switzerland in strict confidence. "I regret to say that the content of the report was immediately leaked to the press." He looked pained at the venality of foreigners.  "What did you expect?" asked Eric Forth, sarcastically. I suspect Mr Forth doesn't hold with foreigners.  Mr Straw plucked a chestnut of good news from this fire. The case had had a worldwide impact, he said, and "it has established the principle that those who commit human rights abuses in one country cannot assume that they are safe elsewhere."  Since the perpetrator of these abuses was, at that moment, flying home enjoying the complimentary snacks and beverage service, this did not seem quite the perfect moment to make the point.  Ann Widdecombe looked as pleased as Ann Widdecombe ever does, which is roughly as pleased as Medusa on a bad hair day. She blamed the home office, and its "muddle, contradiction and delay", but did not have much to add. Jack Straw reminded her of the gravity of the charges: "He was accused of torture and conspiracy to torture," he said.  "Like Gerry Adams!" yelled another exultant Tory.  It was Jeremy Corbyn's turn. Mr Corbyn, I fear, tends to be predictable and over-excited. When you hear him called, it is like spotting the Socialist Worker logo on placards at a demonstration: you have the cosy feeling that you can probably ignore them.  On this occasion, however, Mr Corbyn was saying what Mr Straw might have said a quarter century ago. "Many people in this country will feel a deep sense of shame that General Pinochet has left British airspace. He has lived in luxury here and gone through the courts; his victims never had the opportunity for justice during his reign of terror."  After the ghost of Jack Straw Past, Mr MacShane sounded for a moment as if he was going off-message. "In accepting the home secretary's decision - 'welcome' would be the wrong word... "  MacShane off-message! The very stars would veer in their courses.  Luckily he was no such thing. Instead he found much cheer and comfort in what had transpired. "Pinochet has already been judged at the bar of world opinion," he began.  Ah, the bar of world opinion! Denis has sunk many a pint there, along with drinking buddies from around the globe, all muttering: "That Pinochet, he should get a good kicking, mate, know warra mean?"  Mr Straw still looked in urgent need of a drink.