Maggie<br />by Brenda Maddox<br />Hodder &amp; Stoughton £20, pp288 The personality of Margaret Thatcher is one of the best-known artefacts in the whole of recent British political history. It's years since there was any mystery about either her formation or her private character or, for that matter, about her marriage to the saintly Denis. Her ambition as a child, her priggishness as a teenager, her funless life in the chemistry labs at Oxford, her solemn declaration from an early age that she would become an MP, her earnest tooling round the Home Counties for a safe seat: all this is well known, as, even more so, is the impact her character had on her public life. What was long ago interesting has become, by reverent repetition, a deeply wearisome story.  So, why another biography by a well-respected author, offering 'the personal story of a public figure and a marriage at the heart of it'? The answer is a television series and the commercial explanation is therefore not to be ridiculed. The hard heads at ITV would not be giving four prime-time hours to films about Maggie that go over the familiar ground unless they believed there was one more tranche of box-office millions to be squeezed out. Perhaps I am over-estimating the boredom threshold of the British public.   To judge from Thursday's opener, the films, elegantly made, will have their interest. Some prodigious research has found bits and pieces of footage from the Grantham school-days. Familiar contemporaries have once again done a turn for the questing cameras, which dredge them dry of little insights. The object of Maddox's book seems to be to ensure that none of these is left on the cutting-room floor, even though they change absolutely nothing in the old picture.   Her broader technique, honestly and thoroughly documented, is to drain dry the published works of every other biographer and witness, beginning with the Lady herself, to build a picture of the personality as described therein. Naturally, therefore, there is nothing significant we did not know, though some cameos break through, of which my favourite pictures her on a skiing holiday with her young children, when she preferred the aprs-ski and assumed the all too credible role of club bore.   'Her favourite occupation was sitting at the bar after dinner with a liqueur and debating with anybody who would sit with her,' says a rare new witness. The drinking, indeed, becomes a cumulative feature. As Prime Minister, she always insisted on mixing the cocktails herself, and preferred whisky to gin through the night. And then there's the hair, my dear. An unceasing preoccupation that Maddox returns to again and again, to emphasise, not incorrectly, Thatcher's intense self-consciousness as a woman. But here, I think, in her determination to   press a feminine rationale for the book, Maddox overlooks a crucial layer of the meaning of Maggie.   It is true enough that this leader wanted to deploy every female quality at its most alluring. It is even truer that the Tory men who served close to her did not get over the culture shock of this   woman supplanting them. The jokes about Hilda, like the resentment at the virago, never stopped coming out. But the great British public, I believe, was different. Sure, they saw her as a woman, and many admired her for that.   The larger political fact was genderless. Her severity, her refusal to ingratiate, her lack of empathy, her sometimes terrible decisions, soon transcended everything. After the first few years, her politics, not her sex, were what entirely mattered.   The overstretched thesis appears in another way, in Maddox's apparent insistence that MT could not abide other women taking the limelight; a jealousy, she implies, that reached up to the Queen herself. I do not think this is so. She may have resented things she heard the Queen had been saying about the rigours of Thatcherism, but her awe before monarchy was inextinguishable. A minor royal once told me of increasingly mirthful scenes after the annual ritual at the Cenotaph, when she could be relied on to curtsey ever lower as the years went by, not only to the Queen but to many of her relations.   Maddox sketches in the big stories of the prime ministerial life, but essentially the book, like the ITV commitment to a four-part series, is tribute to a tendency that should be regretted. The obsession with the Thatcher personality has become a national disorder. While exposing nothing, it reflects once more the British disease of preoccupation with the past. Thatcher has joined the Tower of London and the roast beef of old England as a piece of the heritage industry, to be granted iconic inspection from time to time and even sanctified, as if we could never see her like again.   There is, I fear, more to come. Somewhere, her official biographer, Charles Moore, is finding time and researchers to labour over the formal record of the life, even after John Campbell has produced his own two meticulous volumes. Moore's work, written by an unflinching admirer, will be a book nobody needs. There will doubtless be papers and documents augmenting the already valuable quarrying material to be found in the Thatcher memoirs. But the stance, one may fairly predict, will be just this side of sycophancy.The icon will be immortalised, the character revered. As in life, so in death, Thatcher will not be granted the verdict of detached evaluation.   It is remarkable that, 12 years after she left power, no such work exists. There is no comprehensive account, historical and analytical, of what the Thatcher years did to Britain and the world. Where are the professors, where the large academic minds, doing justice to what can fairly be called an age? Or are they, too, mesmerised by a mere personality we need to get away from?