Step Across this Line<br />by Salman Rushdie<br />Jonathan Cape £20, pp468 In a sense, we have forgotten Salman Rushdie. What happened to him takes a receding place in history. Long before the 9/11 terrorist onslaught against America, he was putting his own experience of Imam Khomeini's terrorist  fatwa against himself into perspective. 'One small, intellectually impoverished, pathetically violent assault on the values of [European] civilisation,' he called it in 1997, on the eighth anniversary of its being proclaimed. That solitary hell through which Rushdie lived has perhaps been burned out of popular memory by the vastly greater holocaust of 2001. Yet there is every reason to remember it as a facet - a foretaste, a warning - of the totalitarian Islamic fundamentalism now on the screen of political leaders throughout the free and not-so-free world. If the fatwa had to happen, it couldn't have been issued against a more desirable writer than Rushdie: desirable, that is, in his resilience, enviable in his mordant resistance, admirable in his courage, unquenchable in the eloquence of his defence of values the mullahs thought they had God's blessing to extinguish. Khomeini, for his own purposes, chose the wrong man. And besides, the  fatwa remained unfulfilled. Rushdie lived. He was terrified at first, being suddenly forced to lead a life of uncommon furtiveness and fear. But he seized the moment to show what had happened was not, at any rate, small. At the core of this collection of a decade's essays and journalism, quite rightly, are pieces recalling the events and insisting on the issues that transformed him from quite famous author into global celebrity. This is why Rushdie should never be forgotten. Freedom of speech, seamless and untrammelled, is what he fought for, beyond himself. And it was a hard fight, especially in Britain, his adopted country, where  The Satanic Verses, the casus belli for Iran's theological thugs, was written. Britain was better at protecting Rushdie than valuing him. Our security services and Special Branch are often called unsurpassed in the secret tasks they undertake, and their beneficiary, a writer not a royal, was unstinting in his gratitude. But other arms of the British state could not get to grips with what was really at stake. Ministers shrank from meetings, still less any kind of emotional engagement. Diplomats were regularly instructed not to consort with this Typhoid Mary of the diplomatic dance. John Major suddenly cancelled a long worked-for encounter in case it put an Iranian trade deal in jeopardy. This is the British political temperament: pragmatic, cautious, occupationally suspicious of intellectuals. When Tony Blair took a high moral tone in defence of Kosovo Albanians, and did actually go to their military rescue, Rushdie scorned him for his British inability to reach beyond 'decency' into an imaginative involvement with the Serbian massacres. A tough judgment. Political leaders sometimes deserve credit for acting well, even behind unpoetic words. But it's shaming to remember that it was the provincial premier of Ontario, not the Prime Minister of Britain, who first jumped on to a platform in solidarity with the beleaguered author, and Nordic, Czech and Portuguese leaders who showed the deepest European commitment to the axioms of John Stuart Mill. Like all collections of journalism, the Rushdie volume contains some material that doesn't quite justify being preserved in this way. There are some pretty minor pieces and what seem to me some rather strained excursions into soccer and rock music. Inevitably, too, with his unique personal story having worked its deforming effect on his reputation, a hostile critic might take issue with Rushdie's love of fame. He adores being received by mass audiences. He is worshipped wherever he goes. His ambivalence while being photographed by Richard Avedon seems a shade unconvincing. But what else to expect? As the antidote to unusual punishment suffered for a decade, celebrity is a justifiable reward for exile. What's striking, in the end, is not Rushdie's egotism but the lack of it. This, we remember, is a writer not a politician. He is the most assiduous reader of other people's work, a true and tireless man of literature paying close attention to the output of his international contemporaries. He tells us why he loved the work of Angela Carter, finely takes issue with JM Coetzee's  Disgrace, and, in one of his more important pieces, takes apart George Steiner's pessimism about the future of the novel. He's a total believer in the power of the word. Another curse of the  fatwa was to define him as a man of anger. To many people, that may be all there is to him. But what emerges from reading him in the round are sincerity and generosity, virtues seldom found in modern literary journalism. The other message, however, cannot be repeated too often. There were those, especially in Britain, who regarded what happened in 1989 as somehow being his fault. He, not his would-be assassins, became the villain, soaking up taxpayer's money - a charge he knocks down, pound by pound, in a useful footnote - and declining to show adequate admiration for the Conservative government of the time. Islamic fundamentalism was assaulting one author, but also every other author who might dare show contempt for that kind of Islam. The attack was on civilisation itself. As Rushdie is brave enough to assert, trying to disengage the events of 9/11 from Islam is an exercise in fanciful dishonesty. He takes that timid conceit apart. He is a calm, meditative and unswerving liberal on all important matters, whose own uncomfortable fate pre-figured the worse to come, and now illuminates it.