 1 You need to wear an illuminated and/or glittery item  Maybe it's just a subtle starburst of shiny, stick-on items over one shoulder, which will come off over the course of the evening (the items, not the shoulder) and, if you ask me, will look shabby before it's even midnight. Perhaps it's a makeshift scarf of tinsel, which is the surest sartorial way I know of saying, "I'll have sex with anyone at all tonight" (ach, I mean that in a unisex way - I've not come over all 1950s). Perhaps you have some flashing earrings, a flashing tie or - innovatively - a flashing item of reindeer anatomy (in all probability, its horns). What's your point, exactly? "I seek to add to the mood of excitement"? "I'd like to blend in with the prevailing street furniture"? "I want everyone to know that tonight, more than any other night of the year, I'm going to party, party, party"? What are you, 10?   2 Everyone else was as drunk as you were  I'm not above using this rationale, both on myself and on other people who ring up and say, "Was I really, really drunk last night?" ("No drunker than anyone else," I exclaim, as if frankly astonished by the depths of absurdity and self-hate they must have plummeted just to ask such a thing. Fools! Can't they see I'm lying?). It makes no difference how drunk everyone else was - if you were one denomination more drunk than your statutory evening drunkenness, someone will have noticed, and they will have recounted the drunk signifiers to other people who, even if they were drunk, too, will delight in the story and spread it around to deflect attention away from themselves. There is no escape - even if there was someone else there who was so drunk that they fell asleep on the night bus and woke up covered in maroon vomit, a further individual will have heard you say that stupid thing and told everyone. Wake up!   3 It makes a difference if you stick to one drink  This is the hallmark of the inexperienced drinker, who reads magazines on how not to have hangovers, then believes their advice when everyone else knows that these articles are just coded jokes, laughing at that eternal human folly that seeks to escape the ineluctable laws of cause and effect. You'll be told that beer before wine is fine, when it isn't; that champagne is a jealous drink, ergo it punishes you if you drink anything else with it, when, in fact, it's a perfectly regular (if pricey) drink and will punish you, anyway; that vodka all night has a kind of purity that trounces all hangovers (moonshine); that if you force yourself to drink nothing but beer, you won't have enough room in your stomach to get slaughtered (untrue). It doesn't matter what you drink, and it doesn't matter if you try to have a hot pie on the way home (unless you fall asleep with it on your chest and wake up with a painful circular burn - that does matter). The only possible drink-combining that could make you feel better is if one of the drinks is water and the other is a tasty squash. Then you'll feel fine, but hanging out at under-18s discos has its own set of problems.   4 Other people in the venue find your antics amusing  This is relevant mainly to the restaurant-based Christmas party, for offices of 19 or fewer, who all feel a bit sheepish when they first enter the eaterie (there is something ostentatious about such a size) but feel more boisterous once the pure joy of selfless companionship kicks in. The impulse will be to engage in one, huge, 19-strong conversation, instead of the more civilised three-strong subsets. To keep chat going, hilarious incidents will be recalled, fuelling laughter and pointing, and one person shouting, "Shut up! Please God, shut up!" There might be some kind of (ew, I'm embarrassed even to write this down) prize-giving ceremony, where bits of stationery are given out for categories such as Best Excuse For Not Getting Anyone Else A Cappuccino When He Gets One, Ever, and it will be really, really funny, if a bit barbed, angry and humiliating. And just when you reach a pitch of cackling frenzy, it will occur to you that no one else in the place can do anything at all apart from look on, there'll be a frisson of social guilt, and then you'll think, "Oh, they won't mind - it's probably quite sweet." Try a spot poll.   5 Lasting bonds of any kind will be forged  Angry drunks have no misconceptions about party-bonding; indeed, they are relieved afterwards if any of their bonds have remained intact (and they frequently aren't, but don't worry about the angry drunk - it has the rest of the year to re-bond). Many drunks, conversely, find themselves saying, "I've always really liked you/You know, you're really, really good at what you do/You always dress so well, yik yak yik yak", and then, when they wake up, they'll think, well, I may be a worthless void of an individual, but at least I've invited that person I don't really know on holiday with me, which might yield, I don't know, a scampi one lunchtime, with a garnish of mind-meeting and lasting friendship. But then, when they actually see the potential friend, they'll feel nothing but a gross unease, as they recall compliments so outlandish that they were probably taken for sarcasm, anyway. Friendships are never made in happy times; they are made in adversity, boredom and photocopying. They happen between the two people who had to stay indoors to do the phones on that really sunny day when the ice-cream man had a stroke and everyone else was filching a 99 while they waited for the ambulance. They are made in hell. That's why siblings always get on so well.   6 Office morale will be increased  Sometimes, a new boss will come into the workplace around September, and he (or she) will buy the line that budgets need to be cut because it's new, and so say, "The Christmas party can go, for starters", because they haven't seen anyone they want to get off with yet, and, anyway, they want a reputation for being tough. So, everyone's really disappointed, and mutters darkly, "What he/she doesn't understand is how important these are for morale", as if they know that they've been beaten this one time but that, in the long game, the little man will triumph. But ask yourself - the week after the party, do people start spontaneously clapping each other on the back? Asking after one another's health? Socialising in groups that weren't already forged in hell (see 5)? Practising the female arts of communication and nurture that make modern management what it is? Nope. They are just embarrassed, as - in the main - they should be.   7 You need to find somewhere to go on afterwards  Unless you have an employer so laughably rich that you probably wouldn't want to go to their party anyway, since nobody gets that rich without screwing over their employees, then at some point the free drink will run out. This is known as The End Of The Party, and is further signified by the sudden wondering who all these raddled old drunks are, and where all the nice 21-year-olds have gone, which is also known as Turning The Lights Back On. Someone will say, "Shall we go on somewhere?" and then they'll sit back and wait for everyone else to sort it out, as though the very suggestion fulfilled their entire civic-spirit-and-party-expertise quota for the evening, when, in fact, they didn't do anything. Anyways, you'll think, "Oh God, they're right - the responsibility for the venue is entirely mine", and you'll never find anywhere good, and your evening will be marred by the sense that whatever cesspit you end up in is your fault. Sit it out. Wait for someone else to find the venue. Trust that there's someone more desperate for a drink than you are - there always is. That sounds as if it can't be true, but it's like the hotel rooms and the theory of infinity (it's too long to explain here, so email me if you really must know: &lt;).   8 It's really hilarious to buy each other £1 gifts laced with sexual innuendo  Where everything legal (Mars bars, clothes and such) increases with inflation, and everything illegal (cocaine, land mines, etc) remains static in price, the "present cost ceiling" has actually gone down over time. The first time I went to a Christmas party, there was a Fiver Lucky Dip - in the fullness of time, people have started spending a fiver on their own relatives, so work friends have gone down to a simple quid. Which is great, except you can't buy anything for a quid, except for confectionery and Mr Pound desktidys, which look kind of witless and vaguely insulting in a Lucky Dip context. So, everyone buys flavoured condoms and KY jelly and keyrings in the shape of penises, because that's about the only way you can convey that you're not boring while staying true to your only-spend-a-pound integrity. Except, dumbo, everybody does it, so it doesn't make you any less boring, and it makes young people blush, which is horrible. Don't even have a lucky dip. Even a relatively small family can yield all the useless tat you'll need for the year ahead.   9 Everything will be forgotten about in the New Year  This is closely related to myth 2 (see above). Nobody forgets anything in the New Year, because nothing has ever happened in the intervening fortnight. If you want the whole truth, nothing is going to happen in any of the months ahead to make people stop talking about whatever it is that you wish they'd forget, and there is a much, much greater chance of their forgetting your name and what you look like before they forget whatever it is you got up to. This is a consolation of sorts.   10 You can probably walk home  This happens every year, I don't know why you people can't figure it out by now. At kicking-out time, up and down the country a load of people who aren't normally in the middle of town at this time of night come out of their parties. They can't get a taxi because they've all been stolen by the seasoned drinkers who knew this was going to happen, and they can't get a bus because some deep part of them feels that, on this special night of nights when they've got their reindeer horns on and everything, they shouldn't have to get on public transport. So, they wander about aimlessly for a bit, and when they've gone about 17 yards someone becomes exhilarated by the fresh air and says, "We could probably walk from here!" It's just not true. They're miles away, the feckless drunks. They'll wake up with sore feet.