My first thought, upon hearing of the Camden derailment on Sunday was that it was a prank devised by someone who doesn't like goths. Since the dawn of commerce, adolescents with heavy eye make-up, seized by a desire to pierce themselves and fill their bedrooms with the musks of the Orient, have been making a Sunday pilgrimage to Camden, often from as early as 10am. A derailment there, at that precise time, is like a mishap at Regents Park on National Zoo Day. Add to that Camden's status as the epicentre of London's two-branch Northern line, and you have an accident that is too inconvenient, which in this context is much the same as being too convenient. In other words, I suspect foul play: either someone has tampered with the line using track-weathering techniques that they learned in an underground Syrian training camp. Or someone has infiltrated health and safety policy headquarters, reduced precautions to their lowest viable level and left the tube-world safe only for people using the stations nobody ever uses.  London transport commissioner Bob Kiley, commenting on the Camden and Hammersmith accidents, which occurred within three days of one another, said: "I'm not a big believer in coincidences." Don't be daft, man - if you ran into your friend in Sainsbury's just after you'd been wondering how he was, you would be. You don't believe in this because it obviously isn't a coincidence - when problems occur at the busiest times at the busiest stations, this is because the system is no longer set up to cope with predictable extremes.  Here are some things we know for certain: that inspections of tube track have been reduced from every day to every three days. We are told that this predates the private companies' takeover of track, trains and stations. We're meant to think, therefore: "Oh well, it's not a PPP problem, it would have happened anyway." The more hard-boiled among us might think, conversely, that the move predated the flogging of the infrastructure precisely because the government was trying to make the whole business look cheaper to run, and therefore more attractive to buy. But neither of these views matters, for this is child's play: when there were more checks, there were fewer accidents.  We know, furthermore, that tube and rail crashes, in terms of single-episode fatalities, constitute the very greatest threat to us modern British life can offer. It is creepily incomprehensible that we found the money to pre-empt a terrorist threat that may or may not have attacked the underground, when we cannot find the money to look after the bloody thing in the first place. It's like forking out for a satellite system to stop aliens burgling your house, then leaving your front door open.  We know that, for the sake of the environment, private vehicles must one day become an intermittent luxury, so public transport needs to get very much better, very quickly. The tube should be providing a template for every major city in the country, not some miserable, ground-down deathtrap that only nihilistic, idiot Londoners would contemplate.  The problem at the root of our transport policy is nothing to do with cash flow or pragmatism; it is entirely conceptual. We think of these private companies like collectives of decent individuals - deserving of legal and governmental protection, fully entitled to the two central principles of British justice, viz: a) innocence until proof of guilt, and b) a very slow and boring inquiry.  It's crazy - they must be held guilty until they prove themselves innocent. Companies might obfuscate and prevaricate about the little things, but they're boldly honest about one thing - that their main responsibility is to their shareholders.  Post-accident, we always get into a technical tangle - why wasn't the signal working, why was the number of track tests so reduced, why did that alligator just bite me? Here's what we should be asking: why are we still labouring to prove that these nip and tuck staffing economies jeopardise our safety? Why is it not up to Metronet and Tube Lines to prove that they don't? Why do these companies still have contracts? Why can't we simply remove them, and leave them to prove that we shouldn't have done, on their own time, using their own money?  It's the word "accident" that throws us - for all we know of corporate motivation, we think: "Oh well, those happen, they're only human. They could just as well happen to a communist, as to a profiteer." And sure, it is an accident - nobody crashes a train into a wall on purpose. But with a background of deliberated spending cuts, it's time to start calling them what they are: errors, mishandlings, manslaughter. The twee innocence of the A-word no longer suits our times.  