I don't know when the change came about, but it was definitely at some point over the past 20 years. In the 80s, being a republican (the English sort, not the American sort) meant longing urgently for an end to the royal family, and at the same time liberally (as in "freely", not "in the manner of a liberal") applying the word "scumbag" to its individual members. In this decade, it is more modish to disagree with the concept of a monarchy, while simultaneously maintaining that its members work very hard, and render a fine service to the nation (unless I expressly say otherwise, all statements about the royal family come with the rider "except Prince Edward"). I personally preferred life before - it is logically impossible to laud the civic spirit of a person who, if she had any affection for democracy at all, would feel a moral imperative to step down and take her corgis with her. It may be very 21st century to let ideological opposition coexist with unthinking affection, but it's entirely lacking in rigour. If we have any commitment to advancement on the basis of merit, we need to object to each individual royal in the strongest possible terms. And here I underline the problem inherent in this argument - it's really boring.  Republicanism is to political debate what Billy Bragg is to popular music: it may have loads of diehard fans, but it's not going to win any new ones. Unless, of course, someone breathes some new life into it; someone wholly unexpected, with ammunition of a radically different kind. That someone has arrived - ironically, it is the press office of St James's Palace.  The portraits of Prince William, on the occasion of his 21st birthday, could at a pinch have been the work of rather a naive royalist seeking to represent the princeling as a wholesome young man of myriad sporting skills. However, taken together with this week's portraits of Prince Harry, it becomes clear that there's an individual behind all this whose sole intention is to make the great white hopes of the royal family look like a pair of unspeakable twerps.  There were two things going for these young men, in terms of what they could do for the image of the royal family as a whole. The first is William's resemblance to his late mother. It has long been palace policy to play up the similarity, suggesting thereby that the qualities of Diana so treasured by her public - openness, modernity, kindness - are revisited in the character of her eldest. William was set to take all the best attributes of his mother and father, unite them where once they were irrevocably opposed and create a whole new kind of royal. And while he struggled manfully through the anodyne interview to get in touch with his feminine side - notably, by admitting he liked cider more than lager, which is just about as girly as you can get, short of wearing their underwear - the photos punctured this dream.  In some, he plays rugby, a game so markedly unmodern, so lacking in touchy-feelyness (well, there's plenty of touchy, just not enough feely), so stridently posh and affectedly warlike, that they might just as well have set him atop a horse, dressed in chain mail. In others, he plays golf. This is not a young man's game.  Which brings us to the other crucial quality of the princes. Their youth, while pretty much standard-issue to all children, at least for a while, is nevertheless the secret weapon of the royals. It is their way into a mainstream culture that idolises the young. It makes flesh the royal promise of moving with the times, following post-Diana grumbles of their distance and outdated reserve. It wards off their obsolescence, since how can they be finished, while they're still reproducing? And yet, they depict William playing a game mostly associated with 50-year-old businessmen. Harry, meanwhile, we see in his study with some mineral water, a coffee-table book and a Cartier polo diary. Sure, there's also a picture of Halle Berry, but there aren't enough hotties in the world to make these look like the living quarters of a man under 40. There he is again, in front of a portrait of the Duke of Wellington. It's unfathomable - we're meant to be rejoicing in the totally new and improved face of entrenched privilege. What good does it do to remind us how very similar this crop is to the last lot - right down to the impractically white neck-furniture? (I baulk at calling that a tie.)  Talking of the clothes, throughout history school uniform has made young men look 10 years younger, with one ringing exception. The Eton uniform is too pompous for the young. It is too pompous to accommodate youthful variation. It makes everyone who wears it look as if he was born in 1899, and has never heard of the radiogram.  These portraits have utterly negated the rather likable freshness of William and Harry, leaving nothing in its place but the grim certainty that posh people are never truly young, and that these two are just like all the others, only without the faintly commanding aspect that comes with being bald. It's a bold stroke for a new generation of republicanism, and it can only be the work of a subversive operating in secret from within the palace. Whoever you are, good show!  