Yesterday, the Metropolitan police commissioner, Sir John Stevens, revealed that he believes in locking up first-time burglars. This shouldn't be headline news (Policeman in Banging Up Robbers Shock), but against the landscape painted by the lord chancellor and the lord chief justice, where burglars frolic in an idyll of pure theft until they've been caught at least twice, Stevens had to make a stand. His argument consisted of two points - the first, how horrid it is to be burgled. It happened to him once, and he didn't like it one bit. The second was a lunatic appeal to the "success" of the American system, which we'll return to in a minute. Now, the narrative of a non-aggravated burglary is uniquely uninvolving. It lacks tension, pace, humour and, well, aggravation, and egregiously seeks to unearth pathos from the loss of inanimate objects that probably belonged to Radio Rentals anyway. But what is interesting is that the debate is happening at all. In response to the remarks made by Woolf and Irvine, ICM conducted a survey to see who wanted burglars incarcerated. Fifty-one per cent of the population does, but even though that noses into a majority, you're still looking at 49% agreeing with Woolf and Irvine, which must be a lifetime first for both of them. A lot of people appear to be saying that burglars are not that bad.  This must be partly because the crime agenda of the media at the moment centres on paedophilia and terrorism. In the context of secret networks, which probably involve your next-door neighbour and are all dedicated to the desecration of innocents, a regular burglar sounds lame and a bit passe.  There's also a general incredulity about the efficacy of prisons in preventing crime. A spell in prison is seen - thanks to a rare coincidence of telly and the truth - as a burglar university, mixing the inexperienced with the experienced, and sending the former out altogether better equipped for the higher-quality burglary.  Furthermore, even if you lived out a prison term never once meeting another burglar (say they put you on the arson wing), there is still problematic evidence about whether or not the sentence would stop you offending in the future. The cognitive courses all prisoners have to attend - usually Enhanced Thinking Skills - were deemed effective when they first started, but recent studies have shown that prisoners can emerge from these even more likely to reoffend than they were without them. This could be because a badly run course simply adds to the offender's sense of rage and anti-authoritarianism. Or it could be that they imbibe the skills without accepting the moral message, so they just come out with an enhanced ability to think crimes through and avoid mistakes like leaving their dog at the scene of the crime or ordering a pizza with a thieved credit card (both real occasions of burglar ineptitude in the past fortnight; the beauty of the prison system is that the people who most need some time in burglar university are by definition the people who end up there).  The US model that Stevens referred to is also important, though not for his interpretation, viz: "If you look at the American experience, where they have millions of people locked away, they say prison works." Now, nobody could say American prison works. Their inmates represent a quarter of the world prison count, where Americans overall represent only 5% of the global population, and yet they have 163 times more gun-based crime than their nearest peer. Further, 28.5% of black American men will go to prison at least once; 16% of Mexican-American men will end up in prison; 4.4% of white American men will go to prison.   In other words, any American who doesn't believe that darkies are born bad must logically conclude that the prison system is just the punitive arm of entrenched economic deprivation based on race. This situation is mirrored - though to a lesser extent - here, where black Britons and the Irish are over-represented in prison populations. Given this situation, many people have ceased to equate prison with justice.  But aside from the futility, injustice and counter-productive elements of incarceration, I wonder whether this rogue 49% is making an altogether more radical statement about private property. If you think first-timers shouldn't be locked up, maybe you're saying your possessions aren't that important. Maybe you're saying: sure, it's unpleasant to have your space invaded; it's grim when they make a mess; it's a bummer if you're not insured; but it's only stuff. Where's the fire? (That's an American expression meaning "who cares?". I'm not suggesting that a burglar would ever steal a fire.) And this is all pretty cool. It's when people stop worrying about their videos that revolutions start.   