Political opportunism is a charge that often sticks to Tony Blair. It has been laid with special ferocity against his long engagement with Northern Ireland. In that place the charge is true enough. Mr Blair has been a blatant opportunist. But this hardly adds up to a criminal indictment. On the contrary, scaling the heights of opportunism is what prime ministership here is all about. Opportunism is precisely what has been missing from the politics of Ulster for the many decades of strife and torment. It is defined in my dictionary as "the adaptation of policy, actions or judgment to circumstance or opportunity". Could any talent have been in shorter supply? The definition, though, adds a rider: "Esp. regardless of principle", it says. Does this not make the Unionist critics' case against Mr Blair? Is his disrespect for principle not a fatal flaw? I do not think so. The triumph of heavy-marching principle over dancing opportunism has poisoned Ulster's history for 300 years, and been its particular calamity for the last 30.  The dancer took the stage again yesterday, for what he hopes may be the next to final act. It was the climax to a breathtaking performance. He has devoted every waking hour since the end of the Kosovo war to the making and exploiting of opportunities for an Irish peace, and has converted this, perhaps the final one, into a challenge which the men of principle will find it hard to reject.  Last week in Belfast, Mr Blair's supple movements, a pas de deux in perfect rapport with the taoiseach, favoured the republicans. That was the foot he seemed to be coming down on. The deal he proposed required the other side to make one more leap of faith, laid out one more advance to implement the Good Friday agreement which did not, in the end, have to be preceded by terrorist decommissioning. It also said, in effect, that the IRA could bring the Ulster assembly and executive to a halt whenever it chose, because these bodies would not survive the terrorists' failure to decommission.  This was interpreted as a great victory for Gerry Adams. Much learned analysis was applied to the tactical brilliance of Sinn Fein. Which, in a way, was justified, since the republican movement hadn't been forced to surrender the point it made so much of, concerning the sequencing of events. Blair was putting all his weight behind a deal about which not a single word of republican complaint was heard.  Yesterday, however, the solo pirouette at the despatch box kept finishing faced the other way. It was the Unionists' turn to be stroked and lifted. Of course, he said, the IRA would not have the veto that had been described. If they were the "defaulting party", then their political operatives in Sinn Fein would alone be punished. All those who remained compliant would be invited to carry on with devolved government. This sidestepped the question of whether the SDLP would ever sit round a table from which Sinn Fein had been expelled. But it did meet a strident point David Trimble kept making over the weekend.  Likewise, the decommissioning process had to engage the IRA and not just Sinn Fein. The IRA, he reminded the world, would be forced out of the shadows at last. And it was not merely their words that had to be depended on. "Neither side will take the other side on trust," he said. "We might as well face up to that. It doesn't exist, for perfectly understandable reasons."  It was from this inexorable conclusion that something better than words had been devised. He described the intricate sequences that would automatically determine the shape of the minuet by which arms and laws would be exchanged, noting that the power over them had been taken, finally, out of the politicians' hands. This, he suggested, was the ultimate sign of virtue. They would be ingeniously self-policing, with the help of the most patient general ever to offer himself for service in another country's dispute, the Canadian, John de Chastelain.  If I had been a republican, watching the tilt Mr Blair showed in his parliamentary progress yesterday, I would have been concerned. Did he not seem to be undoing some of the beautiful illusions that so reassuringly appeared in last week's mirrors? Certainly he was offering every assurance that could possibly be dredged out of this deal on Unionism's behalf. The opportunist was working with light-footed elegance to remind all concerned that principle is no longer a commodity which has any value in creating a context where Northern Ireland can give itself the chance of a peaceful future.  For he has already led them far away from the intransigence that principle has fathered. Republicans have accepted the need for democratic consent. They have agreed that arms should be laid down. Unionists have sat down with terrorists. They have negotiated intensely with them, face to face. They have agreed to serve alongside them in political bodies. In that sense they have already done what they said they would never do, which is to enlist in politics with people who have lived for decades by the gun.  This has created the ultimate opportunist's pressure. How could anyone resist it? Having come so far, how could any sentient Unionist politician expect to be understood, in Northern Ireland or anywhere else, if he fell back on principle as the reason to oppose the circumstances that Mr Blair has obliged them to collaborate in creating? There are many ways in which the deal could still go wrong, including the reneging on it by the other side. But the ingenious timetable for the near and further future, combined with the fail-safe mechanism that finally makes words - the poisoned oxygen of so much Irish politics - redundant, are opportunism's answer to the prating ideologues who want to pretend that any principles are still intact.  To expect all the parties to respond to the logic of this momentum would be optimistic. But Mr Blair has been its prime choreographer, and deserves extraordinary applause. He has got this far by tactics of manoeuvre not attrition. The service an opportunist can offer other kinds of politicians is to free them from the prison they have hitherto regarded as their only protection.  Yesterday, as serious and impassioned as I have seen him, this one invited the prisoners to look at how far they'd come. In Ulster, principle is as sounding brass and tinkling cymbal, and the hollow rattle of marching pipe and drum.