If Peter Mandelson had been a Tory minister, he would never have been let back in. One strike and you're out was the rule of the Major government. It had to be. In weak administrations, every personal lapse and every policy error is ineluctably added to the accumulation of proof that these people are probably no longer fit to govern. A trade and industry secretary found to have borrowed nearly four grand from a colleague whose business affairs his department was investigating would have been even less re-employable than one who had fathered a child out of wedlock. The first moral of Mr Mandelson's astonishingly swift return, therefore, is that this is a very strong government, led by an invulnerable prime minister. As if we needed to know. But it might have been forgotten. Though Mr Blair always wanted his friend back, he was anxious about the public response. What do you think the reaction would be, he inquired of visitors. How does Peter stand? Now that he's answered his own question, it no longer seems quite so astonishing.  For the second lesson is that his protégé really did little wrong. It was an error of judgment, but it wasn't sleazy and it wasn't crooked and it didn't rob the public purse of either its money or its honour. Not even the rightwing press could get up much of a head of steamy disgust, and not even the Tory party can rouse maximum public outrage at the prodigal's forgiveness. Instead, the episode is a welcome maturing away from the politics of scalp-hunting. The scalp was taken, but not for long. There are more important qualities in a top politician than his freedom from human imperfection.  His enemies, in this case, were on his own side. We begin to get closer to the meat. The most insistent voices against Mandelson's return were those of John Prescott and Gordon Brown, who saw him as an enemy at court, an operator who finessed their own formal ascendancy. But Northern Ireland, in turn, finesses them. The hardship posting alters the equation. Neither of them would dream of going there. It can be seen as the Siberia of local politics, off-limits to the factions that have become the habitual matrix for the analysis of every New Labour manoeuvre.  This too, however, is a vulgar error. The real significance of the Mandelson appointment is the opposite. Far from representing the conveniently distant tundra where a minister can be frozen into irrelevance, the new minister's inheritance marks the fusing of Northern Ireland with mainland politics to an extent for which there is no recent precedent.  Consider the prime minister's position. A little-known aspect of his famous speech at the Bournemouth conference was the part played in it by Irish events. Why, I asked one of his intimates, had he been so ferociously emotional in his attack on the forces of conservatism? This had, after all, broken with the careful inclusiveness of the past, and caused deeper offence to many people than was Mr Blair's habit.  The sting of his words, I was told, derived from what the Conservative party had done to him over, first, the Kosovo war and, second, the infinitely laborious working-out of the Good Friday agreement. Mr Blair saw the Hague cabal, unable to make headway with any other issue, breaking the rules of consensus politics that are supposed to apply when the nation's security interest is at stake. He has been especially outraged by the Tory attacks on the Ulster peace process. He was determined to nail his enemies for their opportunism by sweeping them into his wider disgust with the entire philosophy they stand for.  Ulster has been central to his life as prime minister for the last 18 months. It has taken up far more of his time than he would like and, while he is careful to resist deploying reckless Clintonian metaphors, has driven him to distraction. But he has no intention of ducking out of it, and the proof of this is his sending as secretary of state the man who, even during his exile from formal power, remained closer to the leader than any cabinet minister.  How Mr Mandelson handles the brief will be a question of absorbing fascination. If it is the case that an intractable situation may best be addressed by reversing the human temperaments applied to it, then the exchange of Mandelson for Mowlam will graphically test the theory. While the Irish verities are no more susceptible to change than the implacable characters who are making the agreement impossible to fulfil, the British element in the mix now exchanges the emotional for the intellectual, the minister of instinct for the minister of coldest calculation.  No one is to say that this will work the trick. Dr Mowlam, in her time, moved at least the foothills of the mountains, and secured grass-roots affection never previously bestowed on a British minister. Her successor may find his cool rationality eventually defeated by the weirdos in front of him. Such visceral fanaticism is profoundly alien to the fastidious and cerebral Mandelson way of doing business. But it was certainly time for a change, not merely because unionism had ceased to trust Dr Mo but because her own preference for the big hug over the small print had required the prime minister to take over too much of the work himself.  Now he has his own man in place, the nearest person he has to an alter ego. Ulster should take it as a compliment. It integrates their concerns into the very centre of the cabinet, under the first secretary of state, since Willie Whitelaw briefly served there in the Heath government, who cannot be said in one way or another to have been parked on the sidelines. Ironically, the only job his rivals would tolerate Mandelson having is one that brings Northern Ireland to the heart of power.  It also restores a good politician to his proper place. As does the elevation of Geoff Hoon to the cabinet. How vieux jeu it would have been to put Jack Cunningham, as was tediously predicted, in the ministry of defence, a semi-reliable warhorse in charge of the generals, as if the prime minister could think of nothing better. That, too, would have been very Major, very exhausted, very weak. And totally unnecessary.  Mandelson, with Hoon alongside, gives depth to what the Blair administration in its next period is going to be about. This is, centrally, Europe, as well as economic management: their arrival doubles the number of cabinet colleagues prepared to allot the subject its proper priority. With the Conservative party marching hard towards the sea, you can watch phase two of the Blair project assembling in a mood of confidence, of which there is no more telling signal than the nomination of the new viceroy of Belfast.