As the golden coach prepares to roll, republicans are sure they've had the better of the argument against everything it stands for. Jubilee year has been a republican apotheosis. The cause has never achieved more respectability in chattering society. In 1977, the year of the silver, it was an eccentricity defying comprehension and ensuring ostracism. But now that republicanism is on the agenda, it faces a painful question: how do its believers deal with the plain and unalterable probability that it will make no headway in the lifetime even of the new-born babes whom science confidently tells us will be alive a century from now? Personally I warm to many premises of republicanism. I detest the snobbery of English society, which begins with the hierarchy that originates with the Crown. English social deference is an abomination, and in the absence of a monarch might begin to break apart. All those titles that rank the calibrations of this deference should be abolished, another iconoclasm more easily committed in the absence of the Queen from whom all descend. The signals that monarchy, especially British monarchy, sends out are self-lovingly reactionary to a degree that obliges the country to expend intolerable effort to offset them, in asserting a claim to be modern. Every architectural plan the Prince of Wales sticks his imperial thumb down on should, by parliamentary decree, be built.  Eloquent republicanism has been taking this stand for the last few years, and bits of Britain have latched on to it. More intellectuals and commentators make the case, and more vox pop is emboldened to do the same. Many fewer flags seem to have been put out in 2002 than in 1977. And yet the cause has got nowhere beyond the realm of rhetoric.  Partly it has been outflanked. The monarchy devotes far more organised time to thinking how to preserve itself than republicans do to plotting its destruction. Such, indeed, is almost its entire raison d'être, and public relations have become its overarching skill. The timing of the Queen Mother's death, and now the admission of the music mobs to the private garden, each of these events massively projected by the benign propaganda machine of the BBC: how could the jubilee possibly have failed?  But this was not by artifice alone. There's also the matter of national feeling, the poetry of monarchism with which the logic of republicans cannot grapple. Rather quietly, people just enjoy it. Asked about the Queen, more than 70% say she has done a good or excellent job. Asked whether the monarchy will still exist at the end of the century, only 24% say not. There may be less of rabid monarchism than there was. Post-modern cool, mood-hallmark of the reign's second half, reaches most places except football. But watching the crowds and listening to the voices this weekend, and remembering the grumpy anomie into which the whole operation of elective politics has plunged them, it's impossible to imagine the kind of uprising on which the republican deal depends.  There have been other lost causes that eventually succeeded. For most of Victoria's reign, votes for women were barely conceivable, the weird demand of a tiny handful. When the 20th century began, the vast mass of British people didn't understand what equality might mean in the real world, and thought the axioms of socialism unimportable into this country. More recently, anyone who told Churchill or Attlee or Macmillan that Scotland and Wales would soon have their own parliaments would have been scoffed out of the conversation.  Why were all these impossibilities in part conceded? Because the intrinsic justice underlying them was unanswerable. The deep undertow of public opinion pulled the system inexorably in a progressive direction. The relevant electorates formed into a critical mass against the old order. No such mass assembles behind republicanism. It's about style and process more than justice. Important style, preposterous process, to those who care about such values. But, in the scheme of things, perhaps even frivolous, more decoration than substance, no match for the atavistic haven where monarchical comfort is cushioned by hard-headed pragmatism: tourist receipts, gossip enrichment, and the unlovely prospect of President Blair.  Republicans will go on talking, but more and more to each other. The coterie is bigger, but still quite small. Its words will be progressive, logical, rationally correct, its tone worthy and complacent and right-on for social piety. Amusing ideas will be scattered around about early abdication, or abolishing all heads of state, or why not let's tell Wills he can bypass Charles as along as he agrees to become the last monarch. But the straight case for a republic, in all its gravitas, seems destined to become a solipsistic passion, going nowhere.   So the aim should be more limited, and there are plenty of targets within a monarchy that is not about to die. The money and the tax-breaks become a greater scandal the more one hears about them, courtesy of the Guardian's reporting on past plots and present obstinacies. Prince Charles's petulant follies and greed for property don't deserve even a monarchist's support. The aura of royalty needs to be removed from at least half the parasites and hangers-on who claim it. These campaigns would all meet the test of plausible public demand. They'd sweep in the fawning courtiers who make a living on the outer rim of sycophancy. They would strengthen not weaken the link between monarchy and people.  More to the point is disestablishment of the Church of England, shafting the now untimely conspiracy whereby monarch and prime minister purport to lead and control the official religion. I put this aggressively. There are more soothing ways to say it. Many were used in a recent Lords debate on disestablishment, from which the innocent reader might gain the impression that the C of E, instead of fading fast, is vibrant through the land, and establishment the only guarantee of this remaining the profoundly religious country we know and love, instead of the world capital for most of the moral failures statisticians can count. Douglas Hurd, speaking of Anglican churches in Oxfordshire, actually did intone: "Almost everyone, I think, in each of those villages looks on the church - that building, that place - as their church, the church of their community and of their nation". The Bishop of Durham said establishment was the only way to ensure that "the religious voice does... have an acknowledged place within the fabric of the nation".  The debate was a surreal journey round the principle of ever-unripe time, rich in illusion, blindly insulting to this nation, part of whose modern essence is to clock up as much non-Christian as Christian religious practice. Now, there's an idea as strong as votes for women! There will be no republic. But an assault on the incorrigible presumptions of monarchy is more necessary than ever. · 