The debate on law and order was potentially the most difficult for the leadership at the Tory Party conference, as it very often is. Yesterday it was defused by two novel factors which ensured that Mr Douglas Hurd got an easy ride, and exhibited a party which appears marginally - but only marginally - to be deepening its sensitivity to the causes of urban riots.  The first dampener on the simple rage of those (still quite numerous here) who would like to see a fair number of people in Handsworth, Brixton and Tottenham flogged and transported was the platform's astute management of the debate. Speaker after speaker came forward from the front line to testify at first hand to the condition of Brixton. They even produced that improbable figure, a social worker on the GLC women's committee who is also a practising Tory. These voices put the shires to silence.   Secondly, the party has found a new set of scapegoats. Normally chicken-hearted judges and lily-livered politicians are arraigned for their soft sentencing and similar inducements to crime. Home Secretaries either fight this, as Lord Whitelaw used to do or they anticipate it by caving in, as Mr Brittan did last year. Either way they are on the defensive.   This year, with attention focused entirely on the terrible events in Tottenham and Brixton, these guilty parties were replaced by an altogether juicier collection, about whom there is no disagreement: left wing politicians and their allies in the underworld.   Once the name of Mr Bernie Grant had pre-empted that of Lord Scarman as the genius behind the collapse of order in the inner cities, the leadership was home and dry.   Mr Hurd responded to the mood by going so far as to omit several paragraphs about sentencing from his prepared text. Presumably he did not want to distract from the main thrust, which was a unifying one that nobody in the hall could disagree with. Rioters are criminals. They are promoted by 'greed and the excitement of violence.' Mr Kinnock should disown Mr Grant, wallowing in pride at having given the police a damned good hiding, and expel him from his Labour candidature.   It was an effective speech, delivered with commanding presence. When Mr Hurd speaks about society, you sense there is a mind at work which is not that of either the Prime Minister or a life-stained Home Office official. When he has had more time in the job (Handsworth hit him in his first week), you can also believe that he will not necessarily oblige Sir Kenneth Newman on every demand he makes, whether it is for water cannon or CS gas.   For the moment, however, the Hurd analysis remains fairly simple. It would be agreed by most of the conference. And it is not a rounded one.   Along with the definition of the rioters as being criminals egged on by hard left revolutionary politicians - both of which are credible elements, not present in the 1981 riots - goes an adamant refusal to recognise the complexity of the communities where the riots occur. Poverty, we are told, is not the problem, and society is not to blame.   This is standard Tory stuff. Yet even on their own analysis it turns out not to be wholly true. For at some levels society is to blame. Apart from beefing up the police, the therapy most consistently advanced in the debate was for social education. Mr Hurd endorsed this. Teachers and parents were at the heart of it. Virtually every speaker painted a picture of social breakdown and the collapse of responsibility, owing to a deficiency of training in the British way of life.   Mr Hurd went further from the purist orthodoxy. He conceded that 'the hideous mistakes' of the past - high rise blocks of flats and urban motorways - had destroyed the sense of community in many cities. Although he also attacked warring pressure groups and the fostering of hate, he showed more glimmerings of an idea of what it is to live in Tottenham and Brixton than most other ministers have managed.   The problem is that this view reaches only so far. It may concede that 'society,' fragmented into individuals, must improve and change. But it shrinks from either blaming society as a collective, or finding collective social remedies. It calls for some kind of mass self education and Mr Hurd even paid lip service to the need for more resources, in a vague kind of way.   But he makes no real commitment to anything except stronger police action. The prevailing attitude suffers from the dogmatic Tory conviction that because many rioters are criminals, no riot calls for a collective social response.   Some rioters certainly are criminals. In Tottenham a lot of the trouble seems to have been exploited by malign politicians. One doesn't need to be a Tory to see that. But equally, what the Tories are most reluctant to accept is that parts of these communities are alienated from the police. And not because they have irresponsible teachers or parents.   This was the great unmentionable yesterday. No one in these feverish days, I guess, could imagine a Tory Home Secretary alluding to it. But it is an observable social fact, well proved by the Policy Studies Institute among others, that London policemen sometimes behave very badly indeed in the inner city. Enough shocking episodes have in fact occurred to make any responsible politician understand that the alienation of the Broadwater Farm Estate has some of its roots in legitimate discontent. Nobody mentioned that both Brixton and Tottenham had been sparked off by devasting accidents to black people during police raids. Although responsible politicians on the Left are now very willing to accept that the riots are in part due to unmitigated human wickedness, there is no answering concession on the Right that the police are sometimes at fault and have come to be seen by entirely innocent people in some parts of London as a source of terror.   The targetting of the Labour Left carried straight through to the debate on race relations. This was a balloted motion, voted the most popular subject among the representatives. Somehow one cannot believe that it was chosen by people who wanted to hear the impeccable tones of social concern and earnest multi-racialism which dominated the short debate. Even by Tory standards it was a brilliant piece of stage management to contrive that the only militantly right wing speech came from a most imposing black woman.   Yet the conference took it like a dream. Not a word was heard from the numerous people who had put down motions calling for immigration control. Thank you Bernie, the management must be saying. You managed to tame the Tory racists and persuade the conference to go on the record with a deeper commitment to community values than it has ever done before.   All the same, one could fairly have looked for more. The police are not perfect. Their conduct helped to provoke what happened in Brixton and Tottenham. This was an essential part of the truth of all that underlay the debates. We will know the party has reached a true maturity when a Conservative Home Secretary has the nerve to say so.