In Jasper, Arkansas, right now, one sort of racist epiphany is being acted out. John 'Billy' King and two other white men are charged with murdering a black man, James Byrd, by chaining him to the back of a truck and dragging him three miles until his head was severed from his torso. This story does not summarise modern America, a society where the races quite often peacefully cohabit. But the event in Jasper is not universally detested there. The Ku Klux Klan has picketed the court-house. Racial violence is not only perpetrated but, sometimes, 'explained'.  Think of Jasper in 1999, and you capture one defining picture of the current state of race relations in the USA. Think of race in Britain today, and you think of Stephen Lawrence. The Lawrence inquiry has become our own defining image, and it seems an altogether better one.  This has been Stephen's fate in death, though it took five years to materialise. Over his body developed, eventually, an argument that reaches deep into British society. The black man was the victim, but he also became a kind of hero, one of the very few black people to whom Britain has accorded iconic status. His name will never be forgotten, in connection with British virtue as much as British vice.  His murder was a racist atrocity, and the police investigation a failure in which the scandalous particulars - delay, prejudice, disbelief - also plainly rose in part from racism. But these have been investigated. The Macpherson inquiry has been, we may fairly say, magnificent. It ducked no questions and has apparently pulled no punches.  By this means, society makes expiation for a shocking crime that was prejudicially mishandled, behind an unusual consensus. A tabloid newspaper, untainted by any history of liberalism, broke the law to force an inquiry to be set up, and a retired white judge of conservative demeanour, with no record of interest in the disorders of society, has put his name to a radical report.  The report will be a catharsis. Nobody, either, seems likely to dispute it. Its language may be questioned, but its premise, that racism of every kind is an incontestable evil, is not challenged.  This is not Arkansas. The National Front is further underground, and smaller, than the KKK. In the aura of Stephen Lawrence's murder, every mainline voice in Britain is on the same side. By forcing policemen to disclose their racism in all its unconscious nakedness, the Macpherson inquiry did society a critical service, to which society will now set about responding. Won't it?  Only part of the response has to be about the police, and the least sensible part would be the resignation of Sir Paul Condon. Resignations by top people for misbehaviour by their subordinates are usually just symbolic: not proof of guilt but fulfilment of a ritual of accountability.  In the case of the Metropolitan Police, the Macpherson process itself provided accountability in massive waves. Sir Paul may not have said what Macpherson wanted him to say - that his force was 'institutionally' racist - but he has been a more than adequate Commissioner, who has fought racism, as well as corruption, throughout his life at the top.  His own battery of reforms, following the Lawrence and other cases, are testimony to such determination as society will allow him and his colleagues, like John Grieve, to muster. Racial consciousness has been raised. Training, recruitment, inspection, intelligence, the need for community partnership, the simple daily awareness of the racially charged environment in which urban police forces work: these priorities in all police management transcend the semantic question of whether or not the Met is rife with something that can be exactly called institutional racism.  The condition of the police, however, is only symptomatic. In the end, policemen mimic society. Working at the most jagged social frontier, their vices provoke most conflict, but the vices are not theirs alone. They have the greatest obligation to bury their racism, and need the most stringent rulebook to help them in this task.  It is extraordinary, and now indefensible, that they should have been exempted from the ambit of the Race Relations Act 1968. Some of the blind and ignorant racists the Lawrence inquiry brought to light and put in the box should be sacked, notwithstanding the fact that many more like them will remain behind.  But the challenge the Lawrence saga makes is broader. It is to British complacency. Because we are not Arkansas, we may be tempted to believe we are close to a multi-racial Elysium. Because we have a Race Relations Act superior in its reach to any similar continental law, we might suppose that racial discrimination is being steadily eliminated from British life. Because we seldom have race riots, and would universally abominate any resort to the redneck tumbrils, it is easy for a white man to overlook the racial prejudice - the soft, silent, secretive, unexpressed but nonetheless decisive prejudice - that permeates the daily life of our society.  I do not know a black person, whatever their class, who does not feel this. Many survive and flourish in spite of it. But the job, the house, the kids, the schooling, the university, the promotion, not to mention the benefits, the passport check-in, the customs desk: for blacks each can be contingent on prejudice, whether in a public or a private person, in a way that doesn't happen to whites. This is the reality of British life: societal if not institutional racism, with corrosive if not necessarily violent effects.  The peaceable but lethal infliction of a racism which is the more insidious for the pride it takes in never, but never, declaring itself.  The murderers of Stephen Lawrence declared their racial hatred. Some of the police who handled the case had their racism dragged out of them by Macpherson. The fact that they did not recognise it in themselves was the most eloquent sub-text of the inquiry. It is the British condition.  Somewhere deep down, unless I watch it, unhealthy racial awareness is my condition too. There are many specifics the Macpherson report should help to change, greeted, as it will be, by a Government falling over itself to do the necessary: the wasted years since Stephen's death at least saved us from the sight of Michael Howard responding on behalf of the people. But the larger effect is more to be hoped for: that whites get deeper into their heads the belief that racial justice is something rather more seminal than a branch of political correctness.