The Tories are trying to turn Northern Ireland into a party political issue. They know they shouldn't really, but they just can't stop themselves.

They are like hungry schoolboys. (Mr Hague looks permanently like a hungry schoolboy). They haven't had anything decent to eat since goodness knows when. And there, cooling on the window sill, is a delicious apple pie.

They know they shouldn't take it. They know they'll get into trouble. They know that they'll get stomach pains if they scoff it all. But they cannot help it.

You can hardly blame them. The more things deteriorate for the Government, the worse they become for the Tories. Just when Mr Hague must have thought that his job couldn't get any more horrible, someone leaked a story that he intends to sack the older half of his shadow cabinet, so he has had to spend the last 48 hours desperately sucking up to that collection of misfits, malfeasors and ghouls. (To quote Jeremy Hardy, if they'd all been born in the same village, you'd blame pollution in the water supply.)

Not that Northern Ireland isn't a legitimate subject. Not that the Government is definitely right in an appallingly difficult judgment call. It's just that for 30 years the general view at Westminster has been that however awful our opponents are, the IRA and the paramilitaries are a thousand times worse, so we'd better stick together.

Mr Hague asked six long questions yesterday and got six equally long answers. He seemed to be convinced that Mr Blair was trying to prevent him from raising the issue. He was copying those pork-pie hatted columnists in the old-fashioned tabloids: ''The Man They Cannot Gag!''

For his part, Mr Blair seemed wounded. He accepted that the process was imperfect and the peace it had created was imperfect. ''But it is better than no process and no peace at all.''

The Tory Government had had to make difficult judgments too. ''They were in secret negotiations with the IRA, denied they were doing so, came to the House and admitted it, and when they did so, not one of us complained, because we knew how difficult the process was.''

''Opposition members may complain!'' said Mr Hague, waving his arm at the Labour benches. Did he imagine, subconsciously, that his party was still in power? Or had he realised that there was precious little opposition to be found on his own side?

Mr Blair warned about ''the enormous consequences'' of interrupting the process now. ''Peace in our time!'' said Mr Michael Fabricant, annoyingly, since Mr Blair is no Neville Chamberlain, and because Mickey, just back from Australia, has an alarmingly tanned face and something I have never seen before, a tanned wig on top of it.

Mr Blair has often been lucky in his opponents, and the lingering rancour was soon dispelled by Teresa Gorman, who rose to quote pessimistic union leaders on the state of the economy. Mr Edmonds of the G&B had been critical. So had ''Mr Bill Morris of the, er, G. T. W. U. M . . .'' 

Mrs Gorman continued with a random selection from the alphabet, like an Enigma machine preparing for Arnhem. As MPs chortled, she said firmly: ''Mr Morris, the leader of one of our major unions!''

'''Ave another G&T'' growled Dennis Skinner. (Or some more HRT, he might have added.)

Someone complained that William Hague had taken up too much time. The Speaker agreed. ''The questions are too long, and the answers are too long,'' she said crisply.

This is the closest she has ever come to a full frontal attack on the Prime Minister. Sadly, he was not there to hear it, having scarpered the moment he could. Mr Blair does not believe in spending a moment longer in the Chamber than is absolutely necessary.