Whatever happened to the Big Conversation? A chill in the air reminds one that it is now a year since Mr Blair launched what he said would be an honest, "grown-up discussion" in which the whole country could participate. "Big issues need a real debate, a big conversation between politicans and the people." There would be meetings, for those who like meetings, and for everyone else, a website, which was launched with a selection of carefully composed tributes from radiantly satisifed Labour supporters. Before long, the Big Conversation had become, more entertainingly, a home from home for the grumpy and resentful: "I can see myself living the last years of my life in poverty," wrote one, not untypical respondent, "the quality of life here is on a steep decline." Others offered detailed calculations to prove that their lives had become a financial catastrophe. From what was published, it seemed most respondents wanted to complain about council tax, inadequate benefits, over-lavish benefits, house prices, speeding cars, speed restrictions, the railways, the bus services, local councils, pathetic pensions, terrible house prices, awful facilities for the disabled, bullying at work, smoking, the evils of outsourcing and the closure of local facilities. I could not, however, find anyone demanding the creation of super-casinos for the democratisation of gambling. Or expressing any interest in smacking.  Overall, the tone - and this relates, of course, only to the messages selected for publication - would probably be familiar to anyone working in a call centre, where staff are trained to respond with an unbroken, impartial silence, followed, in the end, by a bland, "What would you like me to do?"  In the case of the Big Conversation, that silence continues. There has been, as yet, no formal acknowledgement of the public's anguished postings. No analysis or summary of their views has been published; not so much as a thank-you has emerged from Mr Blair. It has been, then, a rather funny sort of conversation. Just as Britain was, for a while, a rather funny sort of GB: PLC. Of course, as any survivor of the talking cure will tell you, there's nothing wrong with a conversation in which only one side contributes. It's good just to get it off your chest. But even in the world of therapy I believe it is rare for these one-sided encounters to go on for as long as a year.  A party spokesman says that the public's responses were fed into Labour's national policy forum. So this will be one of those debates in which the reply comes in the shape of a printed party manifesto. Will it feature baffles on street lights? Or a ban on membership of the Freemasons? Or the reform of council tax? Or the renationalisaton of the railways?  The spokesman mentions the strength of public feeling on smoking, childcare and antisocial behaviour. He says the Conversation "achieved what it set out to do". In other words, having created what amounts to a giant virtual dustbin and filled it with complaints familiar from every MP's surgery in the land (minus the hopeless and illiterate, but swollen by comments from constituents with net access), the Labour party has moved on.  As the election nears, ministers will no doubt cite comments made by other Big Conversationalists when it suits. But without any analysis of the submissions of its self-selecting contributors, it is impossible to know whether Labour policy reflects consensus on the website, defies it, or, indeed, whether it should have taken any notice at all of this diligently censored PR exercise.  When the website opened, Labour officials claimed that nothing would be "off limits". "Tell us your No 1 priority for Britain," they urged. (After all, there was nothing forcing them to publish it.) In the past year there must have been a few of the 15,000 contributors to the website who thought that the No 1 priority for Britain - after local buses, anyway - was resolution of the war in Iraq. But in the world of the Big Conversation (which our Labour spokesman still describes as "a debate without prejudice"), this subject never came up. Perhaps it never happened. Our priorities are childcare, smoking, and antisocial behaviour. The Big Conversation's work is done.  Poor, 'bereaved' Paula · Looking back on the day when she failed to win the Olympic marathon, the runner Paula Radcliffe told the Sun this week that "it was like a bereavement". An experience in the same category, then, as losing stored artwork in the Momart warehouse fire, and relegation to division one of the football league, both of which have recently been likened to a bereavement. According to other survivors, bankruptcy, the felling of favourite trees, the loss of a pension and being sacked all, in their different ways, feel like surviving the death of a valued human being.  The person who was locked up for causing 10 people to die in the Selby train derailment says that his family, too, have been bereaved. No less than the Telegraph writer who last week described the loss of cherished crockery: "Breaking one of your best plates used to be like a bereavement." Though, as any good psychologist will tell you, you can't glue bits of dead person back together and resolve to use them, in future, for purely ornamental purposes.  Perhaps there is comfort here for anyone who dreads the death of a close relation. The experience may not, after all, be any worse than a footballing disappointment (assuming Celtic fans have got over the loss of Henrik Larsson, which was described by a pyschologist, Cynthia McVey, this summer as "like a bereavement"). A few weeks after our loss we'll recover and tell everyone, "I feel as if I've lost a marathon." It depends, really, what kind of bereavement the not-bereaved have in mind. Perhaps Radcliffe was thinking of the grief that might be caused by the death of a recently acquired goldfish.  In future, anyway, it would help if the not really bereaved people choosing to emote in this way could specify just what kind of death they have in mind - animal or human, singular or plural, beloved or otherwise - so as to help the rest of us measure out condolences in strict proportion to the pain, loneliness and unassuageable misery that has actually been incurred.  · Congratulations to Lord Falconer for encouraging an experiment in televising courtroom procedures, the better, as he explains, to "lift the veil of secrecy" surrounding justice, and help the public see that justice is done. There will obviously be vast numbers of viewers eager to see justice being done in any really special murder trial; all the more so if the more telegenic defendants or lawyers can be persuaded to eat grubs or undress before a panel of celebrity jurors. If, as we hope, this experiment in openness is successful, there is a chance of its being extended further, lifting the veil of secrecy that still obscures the inner workings of New Labour's policy machine, in Lord Falconer's own bathroom.  It is here, apparently, behind a securely locked door, with the progressive peer either alone in his tub or absorbed in some other stage of his toilette, that some of the great legal reforms of the early 21st century have originated. No sooner does inspiration strike, one gathers, than Lord Falconer quickly jots the idea - whether it be for the abolition of his predecessor, or the televising of the courts - on the back of one of the old envelopes he keeps in readiness for this purpose. The envelope, with its proposal for much needed constitutional reform, is then passed, at leisure, to Mr Blair, who has it enacted.  Those who wonder if televising his bathroom might reflect adversely on the dignity of Lord Falconer's office should consider this paraphrase of his comments on justice: "Our government system exists to govern. If it does not govern in public, it risks slipping into unacceptable behaviour and losing public confidence."  Clearly, there will be uneventful days when Lord Falconer does not have any ideas for extending democracy. But not half so many days, I would argue, as the fully televised House of Commons spends doing nothing at all.