Like Adolf Hitler, Joseph Stalin, Mao Tse-tung, Pol Pot, Saddam Hussein and Slobodan Milosevic, the Islamists of Sudan claim monstrous liars are libelling them. 'You are terrorists,' Abdel Rahim Mohammed Hussein, the regime's defence minister, screamed at journalists in Khartoum on Thursday. 'Any foreign correspondent from any foreign agency, get out - we don't want you in here.' His goons duly expelled reporters from his press conference for inventing the incredible lie that Hussein and his friends were responsible for the murder of around 200,000 in Darfur, the ethnic cleansing of two million, the arson, the rapes ... well, you know the story.Or maybe you don't. After all, it has not been in the news recently, and not only because Hussein is shutting out the journalists. Fashion matters and today the fashion is to ignore genocide. Quite rightly, the crimes of American, British, European and Israeli democracy are dissected and denounced. But an intellectual blockage - a Chinese wall in the mind - prevents the critics applying universal principles to far greater outrages.The Archbishop of Canterbury, Rowan Williams, made my point for me in Sudan last week. Anyone who had heard the Church of England's censure of Israel might have expected to see a primate filled with righteous wrath. Consider his opportunities. While he was there, the genocide was continuing in Darfur. The victims were black Muslims, but strangely, the Muslim world has not revolted against the Islamist murderers and torched Sudanese embassies.In the name of inter-faith solidarity, Dr Williams might have found the words of reproach they lacked. If he didn't want to talk about Darfur, there was the decades-long civil war, which has seen the enslavement of the Christian Dinka tribe in the south and two million dead, more than in Bosnia, Rwanda and Kosovo combined.On a visit to a church in Khartoum, the fearless archbishop told the congregation: 'It will be a joy to share with fellow Christians in Britain what... I have learnt from you.' What he had learnt was a history of massacre, slavery and second-class citizenship, but he didn't mention it.The next stop was the Sudan Inter-Religious Council in Khartoum. This might have been the place to lay into the dictatorship's murder and persecution of Sudanese Christians. Instead, he confined himself to saying: 'We are at peace with God when we face our failings with honesty.' And so it went on. He travelled through a country torn by religious mania and genocide without mentioning religious mania and genocide.His office said he was picking his words with the care of a diplomat because his main concern wasn't the genocide in Darfur in the west of Sudan but the faint hope of a peace deal in the equally gruesome civil war between the Muslim north and Christian south, which he didn't want to jeopardise. In any case, his lecture to his Islamist hosts on facing 'our failings with honesty' was strong stuff by inter-faith standards.It may be tough talk if Anglicans are talking to Catholic bishops, but I doubt very much if it would have reduced the psychopaths of Khartoum to trembling penitents. To me, the failure of the archbishop to speak plainly was not a sign of his diplomacy, but flowed from his row with the Jews. Before he escaped to Africa, he couldn't say why he wanted sanctions against Israel but not against countries that committed far worse crimes - China, Syria, Iran, North Korea and, indeed, Sudan - or give any indication that he was morally obliged to provide an answer.A few of his critics just wanted to protect Israel come what may. Others were concerned about the retreat from universal principle into relativism. If you say there must be higher standards for democracies, you inevitably betray the victims of dictatorships by blocking your mind from thinking clearly and shouting loudly about their suffering.The confusion isn't confined to the General Synod of the Church of England. The United Nations tried to suppress a report that named the alleged war criminals of Darfur, in a way that it would never have suppressed the names of alleged torturers at Guantanamo. On the blacklist was that friend of freedom, Mr Hussein. While he was ranting at the journalists, he said that if the UN sent troops to protect the people of Darfur, al-Qaeda would flood the country. 'Darfur will become the graveyard for the United Nations,' he promised with what sounded like inside knowledge.Isn't that an extraordinary threat for a UN member to make? Why isn't every liberal newspaper and liberal party fulminating? Because genocide is out of fashion, dear. It may make a retro return in 2008, say, or 2009. Books called We Wish to Inform You That Tomorrow We Will Be Killed will win literary prizes. Lachrymose documentaries will appear on BBC2, probably narrated by Fergal Keane. The Church of England will apologise, as it invariably does. They will all cry: 'Never again!' And at that precise moment, it will be happening again.<b>Labour laid low by the love of money</b>The other night on Radio 4's The World Tonight, I was up against an apologist for Tessa Jowell who turned out to be - er - the new editor of the Spectator, which I had always taken to be a Conservative magazine. Anyway, the Tory or Blairite or whatever he was cried that she was the victim of a 'lynch mob'.Tricky word 'mob'. I would steer clear of it if I were a supporter of Ms Jowell. This is a politician who invited 'friends of Italian opera' in Las Vegas to bring their super casinos to Britain. When the police proposed sensible restrictions to prevent money laundering, she and her civil servants fought them all the way.Meanwhile, her charming but dumped husband has helped Silvio Berlusconi avoid tax since the early Eighties.Berlusconi is not only a billionaire media monopolist, of the sort Labour people traditionally avoided. His power base includes the Italian neo-fascists and mobbed-up political hacks from Sicily. Decent conservatives condemn him as Europe's leading crony capitalist. But not Ms Jowell and Mr Mills, or Tony Blair and Ms Booth.This scandal is not about why the great feminist never bothered her pretty little head about all those mortgages. Nor does it turn on whether the prosecutors in Milan can prove that Berlusconi bribed her husband to lie. It is about the collapse of Labour's morality.I've been saying for years that Blair's fondness for the super-rich and, indeed, the filthy rich will be his undoing and obviously he and Jowell and the rest are still there.However, I get the feeling that unless Gordon Brown takes over and shows he is a true son of the manse by throwing the money launderers out of the temple, Labour will be finished.<b>The lure of filthy lucre</b>Round about 70AD, the Emperor Vespasian decided to tax Rome's lavatories. His refined son complained he was soiling the imperial purple with the odours of communal toilets. Vespasian picked up a coin and sniffed it. 'Pecunia non olet,' he declared with satisfaction - 'Money doesn't smell.'The Tonbridge gang probably shouldn't cite the emperor in their defence. The authorities are terribly proud of their 'cash dogs' - labradors and spaniels which can sniff out wads of notes. I had heard from a handler in London that so much cocaine was snorted off notes, the dogs smelled the drug. But a man at Customs told me they had been trained to smell the ink and would find the notes, cocaine or no cocaine.Pecunia non olet? Tell that to the cocker spaniels.