It seems a long time ago now, back in the spring of 2007, when the Labour tribe was so certain Gordon Brown was the right man to lead them they didn't even want a contest for the top job. They had a clear image of the prime minister, he would be: solid, anchored in moral purpose, a heavyweight able to punch the light out of the Tories - and with a reddish tinge which meant he stood, even if not openly, to the left of Tony Blair. That was the Gordon Brown the Labour faithful hoped they were getting 15 months ago. In the past year, many had almost forgotten him, as a different character seemed to take up residence in Downing Street: Bottler Brown, the ditherer who ducked an election and took from the poor with a scrapped 10p tax rate, who could barely speak like a human being and who watched, paralysed, as a 12-point Labour lead turned into a 20-point deficit. But for one sweet hour yesterday afternoon that man was banished, replaced by the Gordon Brown Labour once yearned for. In a speech performed with greater skill than any of his previous efforts - the cadences rising and falling in the right places, the high-volume, machine gun delivery ditched - the prime minister reminded the Labour party of why they had once admired him so much. The improvement began even before he had appeared. In a surprise piece of stagecraft, his wife Sarah came to the podium to rapturous applause - one of several elements yesterday borrowed from the recently-completed US convention season. Like Michelle Obama or Cindy McCain, she testified to her husband's devotion to public service. Her unflashiness, the sense that she has endured tough times as well as good, threw a kind of protective layer over the PM: he gained credit by association. Brown built on that, insisting "I'm serious about doing a serious job." Riskily, given that he had just deployed his own wife, he bragged that he had not "served up my children for spreads in the papers" - a clear dig at David Cameron, who is often photographed with his family - because "My children aren't props; they're people." It was a return to the message he had sought to convey in that distant summer of 2007: not flash, just Gordon. He marched on determined to retake the moral high ground. Speaking more personally than usual, he offered a quasi-apology for the 10p tax error, saying he was "stung" by the accusation that he was no longer "on the side of hard-working families", vowing that from now on "it's the only place I ever will be". He borrowed a line from Barack Obama's convention speech to ram home the point: "This job is not about me. It's about you." More surprisingly, Brown cast himself as a Scottish Sarah Palin, adapting one of her signature lines, though with Fife in place of Alaska and Westminster in place of Washington: "I didn't come to London because I wanted to join the establishment, but because I wanted to - and want to - change it." But Brown's chief effort was to push the image of himself which, during those first three months in Number 10, had begun to take root in the public mind, before it was so pushed aside. He would be "the rock of stability". Brown will hope this stems the decline in his standing but that was not his primary purpose yesterday. With talk throughout the conference of a plot against him - the only issue being when, not if, he would be toppled - addressing the wider public was a luxury. He had to win over the hall. He did that by returning to what had been old form, staking out territory to the left of the Blairite project. Never mind that he had been the co-architect of New Labour, a favourite Brown manoeuvre was always to tickle the erogenous zones of the Labour faithful, serving up some old-time religion. Yesterday he did that by promising a "new settlement for new times", a shift to reflect the convulsions in the world economy. Now the market would be returned to its rightful place as a servant of the people - never its master. In a sentence which delighted his audience, he declared: "Those who argue for the dogma of unbridled free market forces have been proved wrong." All week the conference fringe has hummed with similar sentiments, as Labour folk have seized on the collapse and bailout of the big banks as evidence that the neo-liberal era is over. Yesterday, Brown was keen to ride that wave. So he spoke of freeing agency workers from "the scourge of exploitation" and laid into the traders guilty of "reckless speculation." That's not language that often passed the lips of Tony Blair. That it comes easily to Gordon Brown was one reason why he was able to remain as Labour's heir apparent for so long. Indeed, he turned to Red Gordon to get him out of trouble many times in the past and did so again yesterday. The politics are not hard to fathom. Brown hopes that by securing his left flank, he can cast himself as the more appealing alternative to any putative rival, who would swiftly be branded as "Blairite" and on the party's right. He knows that the trade unions are not impressed by David Miliband: in yesterday's speech Brown sent the message that in any future choice, they should stick with him. That was not the only way in which the he pushed back at those conspiring for his removal. The public "would not forgive us", he said, if Labour was to turn inward during the economic storm. This is proving to be one of Brown's sharpest weapons: the claim that to leave the country leaderless during such a crisis would spook the markets and anger the voters. But the moment that caught the attention - as it was surely designed to - was a line officially directed at the Conservatives but with a handy double meaning. "I'm all in favour of apprenticeships," he said, "but this is no time for a novice." The TV cameras instantly cut to Miliband's forced smile as the Brown camp knew they would. Not that the Tories escaped a pounding. Brown attacked them more potently than he has managed since becoming prime minister. He won gasps when he quoted George Osborne (not accurately it emerged later) declaring it was financial markets' job to make money out of the "misery of others". There was still some confusion on precisely how to attack the Tories: whether to accept that they have changed, conceding that they now have genuinely progressive intentions - but are not ready to support the means to those progressive ends - or whether to argue that the change is merely cosmetic. In the end, Brown did a bit of both. Still, this was more like the great clunking fist Brown had promised and which he had not yet bared. It gave Labour heart that, if Brown carried on like this, he might just rescue himself - and them. There were longueurs in the speech, especially in the middle, during what even his own aides described as "the policy slab." And while he offered a sketch of what needed to be done to cure the global financial system, the speech was short on the domestic steps Brown plans to take. The policy proposals were all relatively small-bore: not quite lagging on pipes, but home internet and personal tutors for kids rather than an overhaul of the economy.  Still, it's not on policy proposals that a speech such as this is judged. It's on the intangible, almost emotional sense that lingers once it's over. Brown needed to leave his audience with the gut belief that he's not done for just yet, that he could still come back. He did that yesterday. But it will have been for nothing if it ends there. As one cabinet colleague said, he needs to do that "every day, every week from now on". He has to kill off the man he has been for the last year - and bring back the Gordon Brown his party once dreamed of.