It must have been the effect of reading Martin Amis on the prime minister's last days in office so soon after watching England draw against Brazil, but I have finally realised who Tony Blair reminds me of, who indeed serves as his spiritual doppelg&auml;nger. Why, of course, it's David Beckham.It's not just that both men are engaged in drawn-out epilogues after long spells leading their nations. (In 2006, Beckham resigned the England captaincy and Blair announced he would be gone within a year - both prompting a rash of tributes. Yet look: they are both still here!)Nor is it that they are both en route to pastures new and more lucrative: the US. We know Beckham has signed a four-year, &pound;128m contract to play for Los Angeles Galaxy. But Blair is no less of a cert on the US calendar for 2007/8, where he is surely destined to rack up mega-bucks on the lecture circuit.The money will come in handy, because both men are partnered by women with a taste for the finer things in life - combined with a nose for a good deal. Note the fondness for free stuff exhibited by both Mrs Beckham, when she was caught by a 2002 TV documentary gladly receiving merchandise gratis from Topshop, and by Mrs Blair in 2003, when the manager of a Melbourne clothes outlet suggested Cherie pick out "a few things" as gifts - only to see the PM's wife leave with 68 items, worth more than &pound;2,000.Nor is it even that both men have overcome the impediment of speaking voices that do not automatically fit the macho expectations of alpha-male leadership. (Listen to early Beckham and Blair: their voices are slight, even vaguely effete.)All of these parallels are striking, but there is one that matters more. It was touched on by Blair in that interview with Amis. What will you be in the future, the novelist asked: an ex-politician? Oh no, came the answer. "I'll be a former celebrity."This, of course, is what sets both men apart from their peers. Blair was never just a politician, just as Beckham was never just a footballer. They both transcended their fields, becoming internationally iconic figures. When the historians of the future want to understand the Britain of the early 21st century they could do worse than start with these two. Like paired lions on a coat of arms, they are the very symbol of contemporary Britishness.