Schools do it, hospitals do it, even FTSE-listed companies do it. So let's do it, let's see how we've done. After all, this is the age of the performance assessment review and this column is surely not immune. We're happy enough to dish it out on these pages, so we can hardly object if the harsh light of scrutiny is turned on ourselves, just this once. As it happens, I have an easy mechanism in place for some searching self-assessment. A year ago I set out a clutch of "reckless predictions" for 2004. Flush with the success of a similar effort 12 months earlier - in which each one of my guesses came true - I thought I would have another go. To look back at the list now is to have a handy, at-a-glance guide to where I hit the bullseye - and where the dart plunged deep into my own foot.  I began with the Hutton report, which was then just a few weeks away. Rightly, I predicted that there would be no "killer sentence" accusing Tony Blair of leading the country falsely to war, and that the prime minister would survive. I also guessed that his lordship would fault the BBC for its sloppy editorial processes and the dual role of its board of governors.  After that, my vision got distinctly cloudy. I reckoned that Hutton would "spread the pain evenly", criticising the government for the naming strategy that outed David Kelly, perhaps even laying some direct blame for that at Blair's feet. I suggested that some Ministry of Defence officials were vulnerable, too. As we now know, that was all wrong. Hutton inflicted pain only on one side. I thought the judge would "steer clear" of the most perilous terrain - the honesty or otherwise of the September 2002 dossier - but he was not nearly so timorous. He ruled unambiguously that the dossier had not been sexed-up.  Next was the US election. I guessed the final result right - predicting that Bush would win comfortably - but got the other half of the race badly wrong. I tipped the former Vermont governor Howard Dean to be the Democratic nominee, failing even to mention John Kerry.  On Iraq, I was again only half-right. I expected the violence to continue, dismissing the wave of euphoria at that time over Saddam's capture and the faulty assumption that he had been masterminding the insurgency from his spiderhole. That was OK. But I also guessed that the US would spend 2004 looking for the exits, timetabling elections for August so that at least some US troops could start coming home - in time to be photographed hugging their wives before Americans went to their polls on November 2. Not so. Iraqi elections are scheduled for next month and the US is as dug in as ever.  Israel-Palestine offered similarly uneven proof of my soothsaying abilities. I didn't have to be Doris Stokes to guess that Washington would continue to refuse to pressure Israel. But I also said that a slew of rival peace plans would dominate Israeli domestic politics and that the old Sharon way would be seen as futile. That turned out to be right, though in a way I did not predict. For it was Sharon himself who felt compelled to generate a new strategy, in the form of his Gaza pullout plan. Where I was 180-degrees wrong was my hot tip that corruption allegations would finally engulf Sharon, prompting his resignation. It's nearly 2005 and he's still there.  On the home front, I thought Michael Howard would have a goodish year and score solidly in June's European elections. It's true that the Tories did top the poll - but with a dismal 27% of the vote, their lowest share in any nationwide election since 1832. On Labour, the crystal ball was slightly clearer. I wrote that Ken Livingstone would be readmitted to the party and cruise to re-election as London mayor: he was and he did. And on the government's longest-running soap, I offered just one line: "Gordon Brown stays on as chancellor - and waits."   All told, it's a patchy, middling record. So, in the manner of these exercises, it's probably wise to look for some lessons learned. On the US, the Dean debacle has taught me to relearn a rule I used to swear by when I worked in Washington: that the US conventional wisdom is always, always wrong. I can give a hundred examples, but the most recent is surely the consensus that existed among Washington know-alls on the afternoon of November 2, declaring that America was about to salute President Kerry. The US punditocracy has a knack for getting it wrong, and I should have distrusted that herd instinct on Dean - and on everything else.  But there is a larger point that connects the blunders and, coming from a journalist, it's a surprising one. Put simply, I suspect I was insufficiently cynical. I really did think that Lord Hutton, as a senior judge, would feel obliged to weigh all the evidence fairly, rather than give the constant benefit of the doubt to the state he had always served. I similarly believed that the Israeli political system, for all its flaws, would recoil from the evidence against its prime minister. But that's not how it was.  This turned out to be a theme of the year, one I certainly did not predict: unaccountability. Thus Tony Blair could survive a second inquiry, even though its inescapable conclusion was that he had led the nation into war on a false premise. In America, the truth about Abu Ghraib could be revealed - and not a single senior head roll.  So 2004 has taught me a couple of lessons. First, don't expect the mechanisms of accountability to work. Second, predictions are a mug's game. As we have seen this week, the world is just too turbulent. Put it this way: if someone had told you that 2004 would see a cabinet minister caught in a love triangle with an American socialite, who would have been the last name on your list? Mine would have been David Blunkett.