Summer can be the cruellest season for those whose life is politics. The big cat only has to slip away for a week or two and the mice are soon at play, cheerfully wreaking havoc. Tony Blair has seen the summer curse work its familiar magic these last few weeks: environment minister Michael Meacher would not have allowed himself to be quoted attacking his own government's green record while the boss was in town. But Blair should be used to it by now. In 1997 he had barely cracked open the Ambre Solaire before John Prescott and Peter Mandelson were squabbling over who had been left in charge. (A highlight came when the deputy PM held up a jar containing a crab, telling bemused photographers he had named the ugly crustacean Peter.)  Still, Labour's holiday woes seem rather innocent compared to the summer spectacular being laid on by the Conservatives. They have followed up last year's ratings winner - Leadership Contest, in which an entire parliamentary party does its best to destroy itself in full public view - with a fitful, but enjoyable sequel. Once again, the same motifs have been on display: vicious attacks on one another, profound disagreement on the way forward and a desperate fear of electoral oblivion.  As befits his role, Iain Duncan Smith set the lead. He sacked his ambitious party chairman David Davis while the latter was soaking up the Florida sun, thereby injecting a whiff of civil war into the air just in time for the plotting season. Sure enough, the conspirators have taken the leader's cue and spent the steamy July and August nights scheming.  The Daily Telegraph reported yesterday a plan by 50 Tory young turks, including a dozen parliamentary candidates, to break away and form their own Start Again party. Over swish dinners and via email, the disaffected have apparently shared their collective panic at the Conservatives' seemingly permanent residency of political rock bottom. They are worried by polls that refuse to budge, stubbornly holding them at 35%. Their plan may be mere fantasy at this stage, but they believe a fiscally conservative, socially liberal SAP could do for the Conservatives what the SDP did for Labour: inflicting a painful split, but one that ultimately brings the old party back to its senses.  If that is the threat from the left - most of the SAPs backed Michael Portillo last year - the Tory right is hardly being any kinder. Duncan Smith's replacement of Davis with Theresa May, trumpeted as a gesture of kinder, gentler inclusiveness, was a modernisation too far for Norman Tebbit: "The politically retarded managers at central office ... seem obsessed with the ethnic and sexual minorities, forgetting that those who share our values will come with us and those who won't will not."  More insults are on their way from the same wing of the party tomorrow, in a new pamphlet, Paralysis or Power?, from the arch-  Thatcherite Centre for Policy Studies. "Conservative spokesmen spout 'baloney'," writes its author Rupert Darwall, a former adviser to Norman Lamont and a veteran of the legendary Conservative research department of the 1980s. Tories have become "political pariahs", he says, short on talent or anything else that might make them attractive to voters.  "The hard truth is that the Conservative party wasted its first term in opposition," he concludes. Lest IDS draw comfort from that apparent blame shift on to William Hague, Darwall hurls a rock with Duncan Smith's name on it: "More than one year into the second [term], little progress has been made."  The attack has two clear prongs. The first is that the Tories have erred by fretting about style rather than substance, trying to change their tone of voice rather than what they say. As one former Hague lieutenant puts it, in a voice dripping with derision: "This is the lip gloss and Botox strategy - trying to make Tories look nice."  Instead, says Darwell, Conservatives have to get to the heart of the matter, fighting Labour on the battlegrounds of philosophy and principle. So far they have mistaken   Blairism for mere opportunism. That is "a huge error". For Labour stands on one side of a clear, ancient ideological divide: it believes in the active, expanded state while the right has always demanded the reverse.  That is the second limb of this new critique. Conservatives used instinctively to argue for minimal government and low taxes, but since 1997 they have lost their nerve. "The Conservatives didn't lose the argument. They stopped making it," seethes Darwall. Rather than robustly opposing Labour's lavishing of cash on hospitals and schools as doomed in principle, the Tories have mumbled and muttered that they would do the same but with slightly smaller sums of money. That "amounts to a Vichy response to Blairism".  At first glance, this argument should make Blair cheer and IDS sob. For what Darwall is advocating is a platform that would surely send the Conservatives plunging into polling gloom. If the Tories followed his advice, they would tell voters the "hard truth" that they will have to pay "charges for healthcare"; that Railtrack was a perfectly good system that failed only because Labour ministers "wanted to prove that rail privatisation wouldn't work" and that lower taxes would rapidly produce better public services. Imagine IDS or any member of the shadow cabinet going on television to argue any one of those cases: they would be eaten alive.   So the fact that talk such as this is bubbling in Conservative circles should be good news for Labour. They want clear blue water between themselves and the opposition and now the Centre for Policy Studies has provided bucketloads of it. This year's budget and comprehensive spending review drew the dividing line, with the government coming out clearly for an active state funded through higher taxes. The centre's paper suggests some Tories are ready to stand on the other side of that divide, loudly opposing, on ideological grounds, such collective action - preferring a low-tax world that leaves individuals with more money to pay for their own private schools or hospitals.  Labour should not be too encouraged by this Conservative return to hardcore market fundamentalism. For the centre's text also serves as a warning. If the Blair-Brown strategy fails, if the river of cash flowing into the public services does not transform the NHS or the local comp into first-class services, this is the argument waiting to be deployed.  In their thinktanks and salons, this is what ideological Conservatives want to do: to reduce public spending from its current level, around 40% of GDP, to 30% within two parliamentary terms. So Labour, which likes to say that now is the "social democratic moment" cannot afford to let the moment pass. For now we know what will happen if they fail.