Apparently all is well. The custodians of our civic good health have conducted a thorough examination and found nothing untoward. We are in the clear. Sir Anthony Hammond was first to give the good news. He methodically prodded and poked into the cash-for-passports affair, before declaring happily that he had found nothing "improper". Peter Mandelson, Keith Vaz and their numerous officials were guilty of no wrong- doing; their relationships with the Hinduja brothers were perfectly sound.  On Monday the House of Commons sleazebusting committee of MPs issued another set of exonerations, this time not quite as complete. Their probe into the earlier affairs of Mr Vaz cleared him of nine charges, finding him guilty on only one: failing to declare that a man he had nominated for inclusion in the honours' list just so happened to be a contributor to his own constituency fund. Still, that was not too serious, certainly not worthy of any punishment. The committee decided no action was necessary.  And there has been an equally cheery verdict on the weekend reports that Downing Street intervened in a controversial planning application by the billionaire arms broker, Wafic Said. Sure, an official memo spoke of "pressure from the prime minister's office not to delay the decision" on Said's plan to build a business school on the site of a much-loved old railway station in Oxford. But that means nothing. Number 10 insists it was merely concerned with the timing of the decision, not the decision itself. Once again, everybody behaved perfectly properly.  So given this rash of good news - confirming our public officials' complete probity and propriety - why do we feel so bad? Why is this sequence of denials, rebuttals and exonerations not good enough? If the rules say nothing wrong happened, why doesn't it feel quite right?  The answer is common sense. Forget what the reports and inquiries say; these cases are all versions of the same, all-too-familiar story: someone, somewhere got special treatment because they have money.  Hammond confirms it. Even as he insists there was no wrongdoing, he provides chapter and verse on the extraordinary efforts made in pursuit of the Hindujas' applications for British citizenship. Their forms weren't processed by some overworked staffer in the passport office - they were championed by the head of the immigration and nationality directorate himself. The rules were bent, too, so that SP Hinduja got his passport in a quarter of the normal time, even though he clearly did not meet the usual residency requirements. Watching over it all were a choir of guardian angels, from Margaret Thatcher and Edward Heath to Peter Mandelson and Jack Straw, all doing their bit to make sure the Hindujas' request was dealt with "helpfully".  Hammond accepts all this as perfectly proper, but we don't have to. We know what it amounts to: special treatment for the wealthy. Just as we knew it when Tony Blair exempted Formula One from the ban on tobacco advertising after Bernie Ecclestone gave £1m to the Labour party. We knew it when the Tories bagged a peerage for Michael Ashcroft soon after he gave the party so much money he became their treasurer. The officials may tell us everything is "proper"; but all that proves is their definition of "proper" is wrong - and we ought to get a new one.  But how? How can we stop money talking? The default response is to demand that politicians stay well clear of millionaires, by freeing them of the need to raise cash in the first place. Then Blair and William Hague wouldn't have to grovel to the likes of Ecclestone and Ashcroft. The state could fund political parties and all would be well.  Wrong. Even if state funding did not contain risks of its own - like squeezing out new movements by denying them funds - it would not solve the problem. After all, the Hindujas were not offering money to the Labour party, but to the dome. State funding would not have kept Mandelson, Blair and Straw away from them.  Accepting the presence of money in politics, but regulating it, seems the next best step. But that's what the MPs   who just cleared Vaz are meant to do - and just look how ineffective they are. They had to give up on eight additional charges against the minister because he refused to cooperate with their inquiries. They were powerless to resist.  No, we need a new, more radical solution to the problem. And we may find it in, of all places, the law.  For what is the real offence in the Hinduja case, or episodes like it? Surely it's the clear evidence that there's one rule for the rich and another for everyone else. It is a violation of our deep belief that everyone should be equal under the law. That can be more than a sentimental hope. In the United States, the 14th amendment's insistence on "equal protection of the laws" has formed the basis for countless civil rights actions demanding fairness and an end to discrimination. It was that clause which underpinned 1954's legendary Brown v Board of Education decision, ending the racial segregation of America's schools. It has been invoked regularly ever since, with Americans petitioning their courts to outlaw preferential treatment for one group of individuals over another.  That option is now open to us. Under a happy coincidence, we have a 14th amendment of our own: article 14 of the European Convention on Human Rights, now absorbed into British law as the Human Rights Act. That article bars discrimination on grounds of sex, race, colour and "any other status." That "other status" could be wealth.  Put simply, there is nothing to stop two, hypothetical Patel brothers petitioning the courts to demand why the passport request they made for their third brother was not treated as swiftly as Prakash Hinduja's. A Wafic Smith could complain that the decision on his planning project was not announced as swiftly as Wafic Said's. Bernie Bloggs could claim discrimination denied him the policy exemption that so pleased Bernie Ecclestone.  Such scenarios need not be fanciful. Leading human rights lawyer Keir Starmer says: "The whole point of the Human Rights Act is to give protection against discrimination - and discrimination against those with less money could come within the prohibitions set out in article 14." As long as you amassed the evidence and could prove that, say, the Patels and the Hindujas were genuinely comparable in every other respect bar riches, Starmer reckons you could make a serious challenge under the act. At the very least, it would force the discriminating authority to explain why they favoured one set of individuals over another.  The experts always told us this new law would make a big difference. In the US the bill of rights has long been used to advance civil rights, from abortion to women's status at work, that were too hot for the politicians to handle. Now it can be our turn. For those of us who are sick of the fast track and special favours granted to the rich, politicians are now too much the problem to be the solution. It may be time to go to court.