Like a maestro debuting his fourth and finest symphony, Gordon Brown's hour at the dispatch box yesterday should have been his most golden. The climate shines on him more generously than any chancellor you can name. Just days ago Britain learnt that its economy had nudged ahead of France to become the fourth mightiest in the world. Under Brown, the country's accounts have moved from blood red to reassuring black. Yesterday he could brag and boast his way through an astonishing battery of numbers: growth higher than predicted, inflation lower than planned, unemployment at its lowest for 20 years and a deficit in 1997 converted into a £12bn surplus today. Even the usually-ascetic chancellor couldn't resist offering a toast to himself. This fine record was the result of a strong economy and "our prudent management". But self-congratulation was not enough for the restless Mr Brown. He quickened the pace, the maestro wowing his audience with sheer audacity. He revealed delights that would have made even his Tory predecessors blush. He slashed through capital gains tax too fast for the scribblers on the opposition benches to keep up. Within seconds he was on to inheritance tax, hacking away at it at such speed that the thing was in ribbons before MPs could pause for breath. Once he was done, the House could only marvel at a Labour chancellor who had served up a budget that could have been written by the Elders of Middle England. They will now pay the lowest corporation tax anywhere and, if they inherit money, only four in a hundred of them will pay tax on it. The reviews on planet Daily Mail should be stellar.  But he was not done yet. Having tickled the New Labour converts, he would soothe the old Labour faithful. "Something for the heartlands," was the tacit message as he announced bundles of cash for education and health. He had pulled it off again. Just as last year he seemed to squeeze a £40bn injection to schools and hospitals into the same budget as a penny tax cut, so yesterday he simultaneously announced giveaways for the well-off and spending for the needy. Within 50 rapid-fire minutes, galloping Gordon had cut taxes, increased spending - and still kept the public coffers in the black. Surely this was yet another Brown blockbuster, satisfying left and right alike?  And yet it didn't quite feel that way. Despite the confidence of the opening,   the final flourish on health sounded oddly defensive. That was because a performance which had begun with economics ended in politics. Far from displaying Gordon Brown as the unchallenged master of the universe lionised in Westminster mythology, yesterday's speech revealed him as a mortal politician - as vulnerable to the gusts of mood and "events" as any of his colleagues.  For although Brown's speech lasted less than an hour yesterday, it looked as though it began two months ago - on David Frost's sofa. There, on January 16, Tony Blair sought to cool anger over the winter crisis in the NHS by admitting that spending was too low - and promising increases of around 5% above inflation for the next six years. To the naked eye, yesterday's speech seemed like an urgent attempt to honour that pledge - with a commitment to spend a staggering £69bn on health over five years. (In fact Brown exceeded Blair's promise, pledging cash rises at 6.1% above inflation.)  That may be unfair. An alternative version says Brown and his aides realised more than a year ago that health was too hot a political issue to be handled like the rest of government activity. Where other departments could be told to reform first and receive new money later - and to wait for the Treasury's comprehensive spending review to take its course - health, the Brownies realised, was a special case. Ministers might be able to attack teachers for low standards, witholding extra cash until they changed their ways, but no politician could dare do the same to doctors and nurses. When David Blunkett appears on the Today programme pitted against a teacher, chances are the audience is rooting for him. When Alan Milburn squares off against a cancer specialist, it's the doctor demanding money who wins everytime. Brown's team calculated that they would have to cut through the "noise" about resources by breaking their own rules and announcing money up-front first, insisting on reform second. That's why Brown promised the cash yesterday, with Tony Blair launching the major review today.   Either way, the chancellor acted like a conventional politician yesterday, reacting to events rather than shaping them. With most ministers that would be no big deal; but you notice it with Brown - partly because normally he does such a good job of appearing above the everyday fray. Colleagues dislike the way he dodges the flak - ducking when trouble looms over Kosovo or the NHS crisis - but it adds to the aura of Brown as a heavyweight, a grown-up among political juniors. Sometimes he seems more like an emissary from the global economy than a humble British cabinet minister. But that mystique was punctured a little yesterday.  There are three other worries. First,   BMW's dumping of Rover left many Britons anxious to hear Brown say something for manufacturing industry. BMW insists its hand was forced by the strong pound: it made exporting British goods economically unviable. Yet nothing in the Budget hinted at a fall in sterling: on the contrary, tax cuts and increased spending, as promised yesterday, could well have the opposite effect. But Treasury insiders argue that their record of fiscal discipline - turning debts into surplus - should have begun to reduce the value of sterling by now. The fact that it has not suggests not that the pound is too strong - but that the euro is too weak.  A second concern centres on one of Brown's loudest applause lines yesterday. He announced sackloads of money for schools - going straight to the head teacher's cash-box and bypassing the local education authority. That has obvi ous, anti-bureaucratic appeal. But that logic could eviscerate local government, eventually depriving authorities of half their budget and a large chunk of their raison d'etre. This is hard to square with Brown's constant rhetoric about a decentralised, devolved Britain flowering into a rich, civic society.  Finally, the chancellor may come to regret bowing to politics on health. What's to stop other ministers now demanding similar up-front injections of cash ahead of reform? Has he perhaps created an incentive against reform, by rewarding the service with the deepest problems ahead of those which have most improved?  These are not urgent worries. Gordon Brown's centrality to this government was confirmed rather than undermined yesterday. He is still, at the very least, a co-conductor of the Labour orchestra - standing at the front, calling the tune.